Various government departments have commenced with the roll-out of President Cyril Ramaphosa’s plan to protect and create jobs as part of his emergency relief package that has been mobilised in the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic and to address the impacts thereof. To date, Public Works and Infrastructure Minister Patricia de Lille says the Department of Basic Education is recruiting 300 000 teaching and general school assistants with an investment of R7-billion from government. “These funds will also protect 44 933 vulnerable teaching posts in fee-paying schools that have experienced a loss of income.” School assistant adverts have been issued with applications open until between November 16 and 22, while appointments will be made by December 1. “Young South Africans are encouraged to apply through the SA Youth mobile application for opportunities in most provinces and to look out for information from provincial education departments for recruitment in Gauteng and the Free State,” she says. The Department of Public Works and Infrastructure has also commenced various programmes to provide job opportunities for unemployed graduates, such as in the sectors of water and energy efficiency, the Welisizwe Rural Bridges Programme, facilities management, waste management and real estate management. Shortlisting and interviews for these positions started on October 14 and are continuing. All orientation and deployment processes are set to be completed by November 30. The Department of Social Development also plans to support more than 100 000 early childhood development practitioners with an investment of R588.7-million from government for income support, job retention and registration support programmes. “In addition, the reappointment of 994 social workers is on track and a further 815 unemployed social workers are being recruited from existing databases,” says De Lille. Social workers started duty on November 1 and recruitment is ongoing for additional social workers. In the Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, a process is under way for the Special Covid-19 Subsistence Producer Relief Fund for small-scale farmers to retain self-employment and support food value chains in the form of a production input voucher, she says. “This project aims to support more than 74 000 producers with an investment of R1-billion from government.” The criteria and selection process have been announced and the department intends to open applications during the third week of November, and issue the first vouchers in December. De Lille states that, in the Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries, a number of programmes to address climate change adaptation measures, sustainable forest management and retention of jobs in wildlife, ecotourism and bioprospecting value chains aim to provide more than 50 000 job opportunities with an investment of R1.9-billion from government. This includes expanding existing programmes through contract extensions, as well as new programmes. The majority of these programmes are already underway, with several smaller programmes set to commence in January 2021. In the Department of Sports, Arts and Culture, a programme to support the creative, cultural and sport sectors is underway through an open call by the National Arts Council and the National Film and Video Foundation. This programme aims to provide opportunities to more than 34 000 people with an investment of R665-million from government. An open call for funding proposals has been released by both agencies with a closing date of December 10. In the Department of Cooperative Governance, she says the Municipal Infrastructure Support Agency will improve the labour intensity of municipal infrastructure delivery through the Municipal Infrastructure Grant. This programme aims to provide 25 000 job opportunities by augmenting grant funding. Consultation with stakeholders will be completed by mid-December, with the project set to roll out for six months from January 2021. The Global Business Services incentive programme of the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition will create opportunities in the business process outsourcing sector to provide services to local and international markets. This project aims to provide 8 000 work opportunities for unemployed youth with an investment of R120-million from government. “Going forward, we will be working vigorously to ensure the success of these programmes and provide coordination and implementation support to the various government departments and ensure that those who need jobs the most are mobilised to be part of our economic recovery,” she concludes.