The Swedish-made Flexqube materials handling system, introduced to the South African market by materials handling company Lazar in June, offers users versatility in managing the transportation of goods within warehouse and factory type environments. Flexqube is a trolley or cart system based on Meccano and Lego designs in which parts can be easily swapped and systems adapted to suit changing needs. Lazar points out that negotiations with Flexqube about securing local distribution rights started almost a year ago. Obtaining the local rights and viability to make the system available in South Africa was further assisted by the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition. Lazar states that Flexqube is suitable for use in all types of manufacturing plants, as well automotive plants, around the world, to move parts to assembly lines. As an example of what types of goods can be transported with Flexqube, Lazar states that these parts differ in weight and size, from products such as a small, but essential M6 nut, and up to large Flexqube engine carts that can carry parts weighing up to 3 500 kg. In addition, Flexqubes are also widely used in online retailer distribution centres. As opposed to more traditional welded trolley systems, the Flexqube trolleys can be dismantled and reassembled when needed, as well as modified to suit changing customer needs. On the other hand, welded trolleys are “cumbersome” to modify and are often discarded instead of modified, says Lazar. In addition, the Flexqube systems are delivered with safe working loads documentation – an aspect Lazar notes will help customers identify exactly what kind of safe working loads can be applied to the system. In terms of local rollout, Lazar says Flexqube has been received “extremely well,” especially by the automotive industry in South Africa with confirmed orders from two manufacturers in Pretoria. “Lively interest has been shown in our models from other car manufacturers in Durban and East London.” In addition, the company highlights that a well-known online retailer has also placed orders for the Flexqube system, with a number of other orders also in the pipeline. “Lazar is ready at any time to demonstrate to handling experts the equipment, together with video material, to showcase the concepts and design quality and the difference we can make in their environments,” the company states. In addition, Lazar is also bringing in eQart and LiftRunner systems (both made available from Flexqube) to assist customers currently battling with automated guided vehicles. The eQart is based off the Flexqube system, but offers top structures, thereby enabling customers to stack goods. The Still LiftRunner system meanwhile, offers customers an alternative to using forklifts in their facilities. This is based off a tugger-train system. “We have had some great feedback from original-equipment manufacturers in South Africa about both the LiftRunners and eQarts,” states Lazar.