Nissan has appointed Japan Motors Trading as its local partner in setting up a new vehicle assembly facility in Accra, Ghana. The appointment flows from a 2018 memorandum of understanding signed between Nissan and the government of Ghana. Ghana has since also adopted a government policy to aid the development of a domestic automotive manufacturing industry. The first model to be assembled at the new facility will be the new Nissan Navara pickup, unveiled by Nissan earlier in November. The new model will be produced to specifications created for the African market. Once operational, the Ghana facility will add to Nissan’s existing African production capacity at plants in South Africa, Egypt and Nigeria. The Japanese car maker says the continued development of its African manufacturing base is a key part of the company’s regional midterm strategy under the Nissan NEXT global transformation plan. “The announcement demonstrates Nissan’s ongoing commitment to investing in Ghana, as well as [its support for] the expansion of the country’s automotive sector through the Ghana Automotive Development Policy. “Ghana presents a great opportunity for investment, partnership and growth for Nissan,” notes Nissan South Africa MD Shinkichi Izumi. “Establishing a long-term automotive industrial development policy will provide investors with further confidence, boost the local economy and create jobs. We look forward to the continued partnership as Japan Motors officially begins assembling Nissan vehicles in Ghana.” Construction of the new facility is already underway, as are the recruitment and appointment of new employees, and a process of skills development and technical training to apply Nissan’s global quality production standards. “Japan Motors sees great potential in Ghana,” says Japan Motors MD Salem Kalmoni. “We’re thrilled to make this significant investment and to be in a partnership that will unlock job opportunities and contribute to the economic development of Ghana. With world-class training, the local assembly plant will deliver an excellent product to meet our customers’ needs.”