German international cooperation for sustainable development and international education agency GIZ has issued a call for expressions of interest from service providers in South Africa to manage a process to improve the quality and market relevance of technical and vocational education and training (TVET) and skills development under its Sustainable Development for a Green Economy Programme 2 (SD4GE II). Interested parties will also be required to manage the implementation of phase assessments, share and document implementation experience and develop an exemplary Internal Integrated Summative Assessment (IISA) that takes cognisance of and integrates the use of modern technology in assessments. The SD4GE II's aim is to create the building blocks for the development of artisans for the twenty-first century by supporting the implementation of the South African Dual System Pilot Project (DSPP) and its transfer under the Centres of Specialisation (CoS) as a regular delivery mechanism for new occupational programmes. This includes the development of twenty-first-century assessment processes. The SD4GE II aims to improve the cooperation between actors from TVET institutions and the private sector in dual training measures, including the practice-oriented further training of TVET personnel and cooperation between public and private sector actors to support TVET, such as demand-side oriented, flexible short-term qualifications aligned to employment. The overarching goal of GIZ in the priority area of TVET and skills development is that the quality of TVET and skills development in South Africa is improved regarding its labour market relevance. The SD4GE II supports a structural change towards more employment-oriented dual TVET approaches in South Africa, the GIZ states. "GIZ SD4GE II seeks the services of a highly skilled and competent service provider to manage a process that strengthens the quality, relevance and implementation of an integrated, project-based assessment process that incorporates theory, practice and workplace-based experience as per National Occupational Curriculum Content A-21 qualifications for occupational programmes. "This includes the DSPP and CoS projects, facilitators and lecturers, as well as the development of both phase assessment and the development of an exemplary IISA for Electrical and Plumbing trades," the call for expression of interest states. The services must include the management and implementation of phase assessments for 13 CoS trades for years 1, 2 and 3, as well as building and strengthening the capacities of facilitators and lecturers to develop phase assessments. Further, the service must include implementation of the IISA with at least one cohort of plumbing and electrical apprentices. The SD4GE II is implemented by GIZ on behalf of the German Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development. To achieve this, GIZ collaborates with its national political partner, the Department of Higher Education and Training. GIZ invites eligible and professional companies with a local presence in South Africa to participate in the tender. Tender documents are available to download until December 8. Completed forms must be submitted to ZA_Quotation@giz.de before 23:00 on December 14.