South African-born Peter van Binsbergen has been appointed as the new CEO of BMW Group South Africa and sub-Saharan Africa (BMW SA). He replaces outgoing CEO Tim Abbott. Van Binsbergen, who will take up his new position on January 1, started his career with the BMW Group more than 25 years ago, when he was responsible for product planning, marketing and sales at BMW SA. Following that he worked in China and Japan. He is currently the senior VP for customer support at BMW in Germany. “Peter’s breadth of experience in different leadership roles across the company, as well as his international background, have proved to be a great asset in his current role and will be extremely valuable in his new position,” says BMW Group Asia Pacific, Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa senior VP Hendrik von Kuenheim. “He now returns to South Africa, where he started his career at the BMW Group, and will use his extensive knowledge and leadership skills in his home country.” “This is a really exciting time to be involved with BMW SA and I am looking forward to building on the tremendous work by Tim and his team to strengthen the position of BMW Group South Africa and sub-Saharan Africa,” says Van Binsbergen. “I am also really looking forward to coming home again after 18 years abroad.” Abbott (62), from the UK, will leave the BMW Group to focus on projects close to his heart in South Africa. These will focus mainly on transformation and conservation. As the initiator of the R6-billion Automotive Transformation Fund, Abbott has played a pivotal role in aiding transformation in the South African automotive sector. “I am disappointed to lose Tim from BMW SA, but I know he will continue to make a difference in South Africa,” says Von Kuenheim. “BMW SA has been my home for the past six years and I would like to thank my colleagues – past and present – for their support and encouragement,” says Abbott. “I have been outspoken in my commitment to transformation and conservation during my tenure here, and I will carry this determination for change with me into my new roles and projects.”