JSE-listed real estate investment trust Redefine Properties has launched two programmes, one for nonprofit organisations (NPOs) and another one targeting small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMME), in Soweto. The programmes, designed to support NPOs and SMMEs working and operating in the communities, started in September and will run over a period of 12 months. These development programmes are the first to be undertaken following community engagements conducted late last year. Redefine held workshops with the community around Maponya Mall as part of its Challenge Convention, an asset-based community development initiative. During the Challenge Convention, a number of key stakeholders highlighted the real challenges the community was faced with. Three main priorities emerged during these discussions at the time, support for NPOs, SMMEs and the youth. The NPO Development Programme will be implemented by the NSBM Consortium, which includes the National Institute Community Development and Management Trust, South African Association of Youth Clubs, Be Unlimited and Mvelwabo Living Lounge. The programme comprises 12-module outcomes-based training and includes formative and summative assessments of all the participants. It will also focus on key skills like financial management, operations, governance, compliance, leadership and knowledge transfer need in running successful NPOs, as well as leadership development, coaching and mentoring. Twelve local NPOs operating around the Maponya Mall in Soweto have been selected and each NPO will in turn elect three individuals to attend the training programme. The programme will include 25 days of contact time, 360 hours worth of coaching and mentoring, six hours of leadership and personal transformation sessions per candidate and 18 hours of collective reflective sessions on interpersonal dynamics and team development throughout the year. The SMME Development Programme will be implemented by Siwaju Consulting. The programme is aimed at building businesses to survive and thrive in a constrained economy and create employment opportunities for the local youth. It will target businesses at various stages of their development, both in the informal and formal sector. Thirty individual entrepreneurs have been selected to participate in the programme, which will comprise 18 days of contact time, 240 hours of business coaching and mentorship and online learner management system that will host e-learning material and a knowledge library for the participants to use throughout the period. Given the existing challenges of Covid-19, and restrictions on gatherings, the programmes will be delivered in strict adherence to health guidelines. Both programmes will use a blended approach to enhance learning and development including online classroom presentations, one-on-one business coaching, as well as digital learning. All participants will be provided with the tools required to ensure that learning outcomes are not constrained by not having access to technology. The implementation of Youth Development Programme will coincide with the formalisation of “The Hub” at Maponya Mall. The multipurpose space will seek to address the needs identified by the community, particularly the youth, to connect them to resources that will promote participation in the local economy.