State-owned power utility Eskom has introduced its project for the construction of the 282 km of 400 kV transmission line, with associated feeder and transformer bays, which will be constructed between the Gromis substation, in the Northern Cape, and the Juno substation, in the Western Cape. The utility met with various districts and local municipalities from the two provinces on October 29. The Juno-Gromis 400 kV transmission line project is part of the Namaqualand Strengthening Phase 2 scheme and is split into Section A, B and C, with the key objective of strengthening the power network. As part of the stakeholder engagements, Eskom was accompanied by its two appointed main contractors to execute this important project, namely Power Line Africa and Siyavuya/Umso joint venture. The municipalities were equally represented by their executive mayors with representation from the Namakwa and West Coast district municipalities, as well as the Matzikama and Kamiesberg local municipalities. Key issues discussed were the project scope, timelines and socioeconomic impact of the project to the local population, the stability of the project and the formation of the project steering committees. All parties pledged to support the project and to play an active role to minimise any acts of instability. In a statement issued on November 2 on behalf of Eskom, project stability GM Matome Makwela said the partnership with government is important to ensure that projects executed are fully supported by the directly affected municipalities and communities. "We believe the success of any project depends on this kind of partnership hence this is an important day for all of us. The key objective for us is to construct and finish this 282 km 400 kV line within schedule, budget and with minimal instability incidents and we believe that through these engagements we will be able to execute this project successfully,” Makwela said. Delivering a message of support on behalf of all the municipalities, Matzikama local municipality Mayor Councillor Mathilda Bains said that “it is important that all parties work together in a transparent manner for the benefit of the local communities and the success of this project”.