The JSE-listed Motus group has launched its own digital vehicle marketplace, called motus.cars. This platform ties together all the Motus business entities in one digital location, with the aim to provide a simplified online shopping experience. Motus.cars will offer all of the group’s new and pre-owned cars (more than 10 000 used vehicles), motorcycles, as well as commercial vehicles, available from its 246 dealerships, at a single, online location. The website will also feature a number of other functionalities, such as online finance applications and a blog featuring the latest news and reviews. Previously known as Imperial, Motus has been a feature of the South Africa automotive industry since 1948. The group started as a single dealership in downtown Johannesburg, and now imports four vehicle brands – Renault, Kia, Hyundai and Mitsubishi – while it also represents 26 vehicle brands through 246 dealerships countrywide, including 21 commercial vehicle dealerships. Motus is also active in the vehicle rental market. “The world is changing and the way people buy cars is changing too,” says Motus CEO Osman Arbee. “The launch of motus.cars is an investment in future-proofing our business, while at the same time offering customers a safe and convenient way to buy their next car.” “There are several other online aggregator sites in South Africa where consumers can find new and pre-owned cars, but motus.cars is the first automotive retail group to launch a true online brand in its totality,” adds Motus retail and rental South Africa division CEO Corné Venter. According to Motus, more than 75% of its customers start their car buying journey online and more than 50% of all Motus car sales originate from an online platform. Where customers used to visit five or more dealerships when shopping for a car, they now visit one or two, preferring to find their dream car online. With Motus representing almost all vehicle brands in South Africa, it means that trade-ins are welcomed, even if motorists are switching brands, says Venter. “All brands are treated equally, meaning that motorists are no longer tied to the same brand when searching for the best trade-in value on their current car.” Thirteen different search filters allow visitors to narrow down their vehicle search according to, among others, province, body type, price, colour, transmission, fuel-type and vehicle features. Making an enquiry about a vehicle happens through four different contact methods. Shoppers are offered the choice between completing an enquiry form, having a WhatsApp chat, making use of the call-now button, or placing a please-call-me request.