From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Chinese information and communication technology giant Huawei, data-only network operator Rain and the University of the Witwatersrand have partnered to launch South Africa’s first 5G laboratory, located at the Wits Tshimologong Digital Innovation Precinct, in Johannesburg. Natasha Odendaal tells us more. Natasha Odendaal: The 5G Innovation Lab offers a live 5G environment to enable students to learn from and experiment with the 5G applications that will drive the Fourth Industrial Revolution. The lab is supported by Huawei’s end-to-end 5G solutions connected to Rain’s 5G network through a 5G base station installed at the site by Rain. The lab will initially showcase two 5G applications, namely smart/safe campus and virtual reality remote education. Huawei Southern Africa Region VP Yang Chen tells us more. Huawei Southern Africa Region VP Yang Chen: Natasha Odendaal: With most applications expected to run in a 5G network environment during the 4IR era, the lab aims to start driving innovations and showcase the tangible impacts of 5G on multiple fronts. Huawei Southern Africa Region VP Yang Chen: Natasha Odendaal: The partnership between industry and academia is expected to be a launchpad for the incubation of innovative applications and business models and build knowledge of the revolutionary technology’s applications for the local market to unleash the full potential of 5G for South Africa and the rest of Africa. Wits is currently working with the pioneers in digital innovation to train a generation of smart, savvy scholars who will transform the world, using the latest technology available to effect beneficial change. Wits vice-chancellor and principal Professor Adam Habib: Natasha Odendaal: The new 5G lab is situated in the university’s incubation hub, which provides access to the knowledge, research and invention of various university labs and the insight and innovation in the minds of students and researchers. Tshimologong CEO Lesley Williams: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.