Construction of the new concept Courtyard Hotel at Waterfall City, in Midrand, is nearing completion, with the hotel set to open in the first quarter of 2021. The ten-storey hotel will feature a rooftop function area and a 100-seater conference facility. In addition to 164 rooms (16 of which are interleading), there are four suites, meeting rooms, a swimming pool and gym. The hotel will also feature a large, independent restaurant on the ground level. While succulent plants are echoed in the décor of the rooms, on the floor rugs and planters, the hotel signage out front is set into a living wall made of recycled plastic planters. The use of protea wallpaper and artwork in the hotel’s restaurant continues the green theme, and the plush banquette and dropped lighting create an appealing space to relax, work and dine, the developers note in a statement issued on November 9. The public lounge, meanwhile, has a communal table with plug points as a shared and physical-distanced workspace which hosts several comfortable seating options. The public areas also feature various flooring solutions and wall coverings, and are illuminated by original and striking lighting features. The rooftop restaurant and function area has a large, double-volume, modern space which “makes the most” of its lofty position to maximise the views across the city and spectacular Highveld sunsets given the hotel’s western orientation. The four suites are also on the top floor and are accessible through a security-controlled doorway off of the elevators. Each suite accommodates two people and has a full bathroom with bath (the remainder of the hotel rooms have showers only), small kitchenette and lounge area, as well as private patio with unobstructed panoramic views across the manmade forest that is Johannesburg. The suites’ luxurious bathrooms also have large open showers, and the rooms feature controlled mood lighting. For business meetings and events, there are three dividable 30-seater meeting rooms, which when consolidated can accommodate about 100 people, or 120 people when set up banquet-style with 15 eight-seater tables. Fast and reliable WiFi throughout the property is also available, and the property hosts plenty of secure parking in the basement. The rapidly growing node between Johannesburg and Midrand includes the Mall of Africa shopping and entertainment complex and draws both business and leisure travellers. “Research indicates that this new concept Courtyard Hotel will be popular with our core market. The hospitality landscape has changed dramatically since we first conceived of this hotel as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic; however, the key offering remains in line with principal demand and trends, and we are looking forward to welcoming guests to this exciting new space,” City Lodge Hotel Group CEO Andrew Widegger comments. The Courtyard Hotel Waterfall City will be the sixth Courtyard Hotel within the group, adding to the one each in Pretoria and Port Elizabeth and three in Johannesburg. Once it is operational, the group will have 63 hotels in six countries offering 8 070 rooms to business and leisure travellers.