A University of Johannesburg (UJ) professor has become the first African woman to be elected as a VP of the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS). She is Algerian-born South African Medical Geology Professor Hassina Mouri. The IUGS was founded in 1961 and is one of the largest scientific organisations in the world. Its member bodies represent more than a million geoscientists worldwide, and it seeks to facilitate and advance international cooperation for the study of geological problems, as well as interdisciplinary cooperation in the Earth sciences. “I would like to take this opportunity to extend my sincere gratitude for the confidence that the National Research Foundation of South Africa had in me to nominate me for this prestigious position,” she affirmed. “This position, together with my most recent appointment by UNESCO [United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation] for the position of council member of the International Geoscience Programme, are equally important for African geoscience. It is a privilege and an honour and I look forward to contribute to both organisations and the future of Earth sciences in Africa and globally.” She first developed her interest in medical geology during 2013. Medical geology is concerned with the relationship between natural geological materials and processes and human and animal health. Her focus in this field is on issues related to the African continent. She has presented her work at several international conferences and published in several international journals. During her career she has worked in Africa, Europe and North America. She has been associated with the University of Paris; the French National Natural History Museum, Paris; the University of Helsinki, Finland; the Geological Survey of Finland; the Swedish Museum of Natural History; the University of Minnesota, in the US; and now UJ. In South Africa, she was chairperson of the South African National Committee for the IUGS from 2017 to 2020 and a member of the South African Journal of Science advisory board. Mouri’s term as IUGS VP starts immediately and runs until 2024.