Business for South Africa (B4SA), the alliance of volunteers formed to support the national response to Covid-19, has welcomed President Cyril Ramaphosa’s announcement about the easing of certain restrictions, which it says bolsters the much-needed efforts to boost and stimulate economic activity. However, B4SA has highlighted the importance for South Africa’s economic recovery of implementing infrastructure projects, as soon as possible, to boost economic growth and job creation. The organisation posits that this imperative has become even more pressing following the release of Statistics South Africa’s Quarterly Labour Force Survey (QLFS) for the third quarter. Quarter-on-quarter, the survey recorded a 7.5% increase in the number of unemployed people, which is the highest rate recorded since the start of the QLFS in 2008. Expanded unemployment has reached its highest ever level of 43.1%, which B4SA says demonstrates the need for the country to urgently pivot onto a sustainable, inclusive growth trajectory. B4SA is advancing the numerous activities outlined in its Economic Recovery Strategy and remains committed to supporting the President’s Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan, it notes. “Many parts of South Africa’s economy still remain extremely constrained and are contributing far less than their potential. The resumption of international travel for business and leisure purposes, as well as the resumption of full trading for the alcohol industry is a welcome and critical relief to those sectors. "Easing the alcohol and international travel restrictions will ensure these sectors can continue their respective rebuilding efforts and enhance the role they can play in the revival of the country’s economy,” the organisation says. B4SA also notes its full support of the President in his reminding the nation that it is critical for every individual to maintain good hygiene habits, practice physical distancing and wear a mask wherever necessary, including while out in public. It also says that it is pleasing that the Special Covid-19 Grant has been extended for a further three months to January 2021. B4SA also welcomes the decision to extend the Covid Temporary Employer/Employee Relief Scheme benefit for a further month and is hopeful that it may be extended further in due course.