Financial services provider FNB on November 9 launched its latest edition of nav>> Smart Tools via its FNB application (app) to assist customers in managing their money better through "dynamic budgeting", as well as facilitating access to market and creating a digital marketplace for FNB-banked small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the 'home services' category. Through the app, customers can now intuitively manage their money through nav >> Smart Budget to help them spend less than they earn, access vehicle finance from WesBank, as well as get access to deals and discounts via nav >> Car. Customers can also use the app to list their homes privately within minutes or through an FNB-banked real estate agent. Customers will also get exclusive access to Netcare Plus general practitioner (GP) vouchers through the FNB app. Nav >> Home Services, specifically, is a new market place to support SMEs through offering home services such as electrical, building, plumbing and alternative energy to more than three-million FNB app users. Individual customers will also have the option to select from over 1 500 SMEs that are already a part of the marketplace. FNB CEO Jacques Celliers said during the virtual launch event that the launch of the latest smart tools was aimed at assisting small businesses, "which are the backbone of our economy and have taken a lot of strain this year [owing] to the Covid-19 pandemic". "We believe this digitised marketplace solution will help them boost their income over time and become a key revenue line in their day-to-day business." WesBank Motor CEO Ghana Msibi, meanwhile, noted that, through the nav >> Car smart solution, WesBank was looking "holistically" at the journey of owning and maintaining a vehicle, and that WesBank had "identified value adding, contextual and simplified solutions" for customers. Customers will officially be able to access a variety of nav» Solutions on the FNB app, including the likes of smart budget, which "empowers customers and gives them more control over their money". This tool uses the bank's data capability to create a level of accountability as well as real-time coaching. Through the tool, customer can set different budget limits - ranging from fixed to smart alerts, and even get timely notifications. Through nav >> Car, FNB-banked customers can access a list of unique offers, brands and vehicles, as well as streamline pre-approved finance from WesBank via the tool on the app. Nav >> Home buying and selling allows customers to list their properties in minutes, either with an FNB business banked real estate agent or privately and will allow them to access thousands of FNB pre-approved buyers. Customers will also have access to special deals on new property developments. To date, FNB has already approved R20-billion's worth of home loans through this platform. Through the home services option, customers can search for an FNB-banked service provider, communicate via the app and share images of the problem area and agree on a suitable time for a site visit. Once the job has been completed, payment can be done via the app and the service provider can also be rated and reviewed. Nav >> Wellness, meanwhile, has, in just over a year since its initial launch, assisted over 100 000 customers to cope with a redefined reality of change. FNB has put together mindfulness and health solutions to help these customers understand their personalised wellness scores, and offers suggested goals, as well as tips to coach them on their journeys. Customers will also get access to an exclusive offer with NetcarePlus, which offers discounted GP vouchers for a virtual consultation at R290, face-to-face consultations at R350 and GP consultations (including acute medication) at R430. Customers will also be able to buy vouchers for others to use. "Our smart tools have already had a meaningful impact on both our individual customers and business clients. As an integrated financial services provider, we believe there is a great opportunity in creating smart connections among customers by using our dynamic data capabilities and secure platform," Celliers concludes.