Centurion Systems won the award for Most Innovative Company of the Year during this year's Steel and Engineering Industries Federation of Southern Africa (Seifsa) Awards for Excellence. This year's ceremony was held in a Covid-19-compliant manner at Summer Place, in Boksburg, on November 25. The yearly Seifsa Awards for Excellence promote and reward innovation and excellence in the metals and engineering sector. This year’s awards covered the period between July 2018 and December 2019 and vindicate Seifsa’s belief that, even during difficult times, there are companies in the sector that display excellence and innovation at a time when many others choose to forgo these efforts to cut costs to survive. Centurion Systems won its award for creating a solution “that pushed the boundaries of speed, intelligence and technological sophistication, while giving a superior user experience”, according to the judges. The company’s D5 Smart gate motor had lived up to the company’s brand essence of “making lives easier”, the judges added. Further, for the second year in a row, Pamodzi Unique Engineering received the Most Transformed Company Award, having stood out for the consistent and successful implementation of its transformation strategy over the past five years, which culminated in it achieving a Level 1 black-economic empowerment status on its scorecard for 2019. The judges were especially impressed by its successful apprenticeship programme and enterprise and supplier development initiative. Babcock Ntuthuko Engineering won the Health and Safety Award, having displayed excellence in this category through several interventions put in place to safeguard its employees. The interventions resulted in the company recording a zero disabling injury incident rate across all its business units, a performance that it has maintained for the past 24 months. While Beka Schréder was the only entrant in the Best Corporate Social Responsibility category, the judges saw it fitting to recognise it for the work it had done in uplifting a community in one of the more impoverished areas of the country. By installing 16 light-emitting-diode-type streetlights in the East London town of Chintsa East in the Eastern Cape, Beka Shréder enabled community members to walk freely and children to play at night. In the Artisan of the Year category, Kgabo Cars and Training & Services won for the highest activity in artisan training each year for itself and the industry. In 2019 alone, the company trained 67 apprentices at different levels. In addition to these awards, Seifsa recognised the Cape Engineers and Founders’ Association with the CEO’s Award for Association of the Year. This prestigious award is presented to a Seifsa-affiliated association that has shown the best level of compliance, growth, participation and benefit offered to its membership and for promoting the interests of members in a specific region or sector. HC Heat-Exchangers received the CEO’s Award for Company of the Year for having engaged with Seifsa the most, using the federation’s products and attending its events. Further, SA Reinforced Concrete Engineers Association (Sarcea) director Jeffery Thomas was honoured with the CEO’s Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Industry. According to Seifsa, he has played a significant role in the industry for the past 50 years. Apart from being at the forefront of various training schemes, Thomas has served on the Seifsa council for the past 25 years as a representative of Sarcea. Seifsa CEO Kaizer Nyatsumba congratulates all the recipients of the awards. “Each one of them demonstrates that the metals and engineering industry is brimming with potential and excellence, giving us the confidence that we can turn the industry’s fortunes around if we all focus on building partnerships that allow us to focus on our strengths and excellence.”