A year ago, the first PWR BLOK from the Swedish clean technology company Swedish Stirling was commissioned at ferrochrome producer Afarak's Mogale site, in South Africa. The company is now ready to launch on a larger commercial scale in the country. It tells Mining Weekly that it has raised just under R1-billion from new, knowledgeable investors to begin volume production in the coming year. PWR BLOK, which is based on the Stirling technology used in Swedish submarines, is a unique new solution for energy recovery of industrial residual gases. Swedish Stirling notes that the technology has the potential for large cost savings for South Africa's metals industry, while simultaneously significantly reducing carbon dioxide emissions. Metal production is characteristically extremely electricity-intensive. The energy bill accounts for about one-third of the industry’s total cost and half of all that energy is then lost in the form of residual gases that are only flared away. The industry has long grappled with this issue and has pursued solutions to recover parts of this energy to reduce costs. Attempts with internal combustion engines, gas and steam turbines have been tried, but have often been unsuccessful. The company asserts that this is owing to the gas being of such uneven quality that most engines with internal combustion do not work, or the technical solutions are simply too expensive. By contrast, it enthuses that the PWR BLOK is able to handle residual gas with uneven quality, owing to the Stirling engine and the fact that the heat is applied externally. The PWR BLOK is placed adjacent to the smelter and the residual gas is fed to, and combusted in, the power conversion unit (PCU). The heat is then converted by the Stirling engines into electricity that is returned to the smelter. The recycling reduces the producer's need to buy electricity by up to 15% and, therefore, also carbon dioxide emissions. A single PWR BLOK reduces emissions in South Africa by about 3 500 t/y, notes the company. AFARAK MOGALE OPERATION Swedish Stirling notes that its collaboration with Afarak has enabled it to run extensive operations and tests of the PWR BLOK at the plant in Mogale. The company's South African team has been able to demonstrate that the PWR BLOK is capable of producing electricity of grid quality, even at extremely varied gas qualities with high hydrogen content. The PWR BLOK is also able to manage the particles that are always present in residual gases, which was an element of uncertainty for Swedish Stirling's technicians at the start of the project. "Thanks to the collaboration with Afarak Mogale, we have gained valuable test results and experience that we have now used to further develop the technology. With the amount of operation hours, we feel confident to proceed on a larger commercial scale," says Swedish Stirling CTO Heije Westberg. “Swedish Stirling’s standard of performance during the project was highly commendable and it was a privilege for Afarak Mogale to be associated with this ground-breaking energy conversion project. "It is welcoming that Swedish Sterling acknowledges the association and support of Afarak Mogale in the energy conversion technology developed for the ferrochrome smelting industry, and when the market conditions improve re-establishing the good relationship,” says Afarak Mogale GM Wayne Pickering. NEXT PHASE Swedish Stirling is now preparing the installation of an upgraded version of PWR BLOK (Generation 2) – which was shipped from Sweden in February. The new unit has a new control system that the company says will make it far easier to integrate new features and to optimise operation in the future. It will shortly be commissioned into full commercial operation at Samancor Chrome's TC Smelter plant in the North West province. “We are excited to get the PWR BLOK installed and commissioned as soon as possible. We are really looking forward to seeing how the PWR BLOK Generation 2 will change the future of using our off gas energy into big savings for the company,” says Samancor TC Smelter maintenance superintendent Albertus Van der Merwe. Swedish Stirling’s research and development team is also currently working on its PWR BLOK Generation 3. This is the version of PWR BLOK that Swedish Stirling will start to produce on a larger scale. Demand for new PWR BLOKs is extremely high, the company notes. Swedish Stirling says diversified miner Glencore and other companies have also expressed an interest in using the technology. To be able to finalise the full scale launch in South Africa, Swedish Stirling raised additional capital in March from several new investors – both institutional and private. Investors include Spotify CEO and founder Daniel Ek. “I am excited to be given the opportunity to invest in this clean tech company and look forward to seeing the continued developments for Swedish Stirling,” says Ek. The company will implement the roll-out in South Africa through its subsidiary, Swedish Stirling South Africa, in Johannesburg. The company is targeting all smelters owned by those who are already its clients. Currently, it already has Samancor and Glencore as clients.