One-time verification (OTV) is a biometric-based technology that is used to validate customer identities remotely and securely, while also enabling companies to more effectively capture, store and protect customer data, says biometric identity service provider WhoYou business development director Craig Hills. The company developed OTV as a more rigorous and secure remote verification technology than a one-time pin (OTP). Remote verification is also important in current operating conditions as a result of the need for physical distancing. The OTV process uses short-message service, email or other existing gateways, such as chat services or WhatsApp, to send a link to clients. This link either opens in a business’s app or in the customer’s Web browser on their mobile phone or even laptop. The client then captures their unique biometric information, through a photograph of their fingerprint, face or both, in order to verify their identity. "WhoYou electronically sends the facial or fingerprint data, with the individual's consent, to the National Population Register (NPR), which is maintained and managed by the Department of Home Affairs (DHA). The DHA then confirms the individual’s identity in line with its security standards," Hills explains. He states that OTPs are only effective if the correct person is reached. In recent years; illegal subscriber identity module swaps, phone thefts and telecommunications fraud have highlighted the weaknesses in this technology. Implementing OTV can shore up your security and limit losses for the long-term. "Our OTV technology will help curb the ever-growing problem of identity fraud. According to statistics released by the Southern African Fraud Prevention Service, the impersonation by fraudsters using real identity numbers and names doubled from 2018 to 2019. “We see our OTV technology as advancing the cause for more secure and reliable remote verifications of customers. We believe that businesses in sectors such as financial services, healthcare, automotive, retail and telecoms will particularly benefit from our remote verification technology, especially when considering their current reliance on older technologies like OTP," says Hills. He added that the link that a user receives has no trail to any personal or confidential information. Once verification is complete, no biometric information is stored on the customer’s device either. The data is only stored in the customer’s confidential WhoYou vault, and can easily be accessed whenever your business engages with them. "The result of this is that your customers only need to be verified once, making the experience more convenient for them. WhoYou is also a registered credit bureau with the National Credit Regulator and works in strict compliance with the likes of the Protection of Personal Information Act and the General Data Protection Regulation," he states.