Nonprofit organisation AfricaBeyond4IR's (AB4IR's) Digital Hub is hosting a series of webinars to develop animation, gaming and programme development skills among the youth and entrepreneurs in Tshwane. The Digital Hub, located in Mabopane Odi Campus, is a collaboration between the Small Enterprise Development Agency (Seda) and the Tshwane South Technical and Vocational Education and Training College. "The digital hub is set up to empower the youth in Mabopane, Hebron, Klipgat, Soshanguve and Garankuwa with a focus on technology, innovation and incubation. The youth will also be introduced to new technologies, be exposed to new ways of working and be able to incubate their ideas to enable them to access the market and commercialise their innovations. To achieve this, the organisation has partnered with government, private sector and academia," says AB4IR CEO Kelebogile Molopyane. "Despite Africa being one of the fastest growing technology markets in the world, entrepreneurs' participation in the gaming and animation technology sector remains considerably low. AB4IR aims to bridge the digital divide to empower communities through technology, innovation and incubation," she adds. The facility will provide services such as an incubation programme focusing on animation and gaming, as well as mentorship, networking and collaborative opportunities for entrepreneurs. Molopyane says the facility is expected to be up and running by July. The webinars are open to anyone with a laptop and Internet connection with no age restrictions, she highlights. “We are very excited with this project. The new facility will be a clear illustration of Gauteng digital transformation, and is a collaborative platform to accelerate, with our partners, the development and state of innovation in the gaming and animation sector. We cannot wait to incubate entrepreneurs," says Molopyane. The hub has already hosted animation and gaming webinars during May and hosted a three-day webinar in early June. Its mandate in the communities is to accelerate technological innovation in gaming and animation.