Global packaging and paper group Mondi has donated 100 000 FFP3/N95 medical grade masks to protect frontline healthcare workers in KwaZulu-Natal from Covid-19. The much sought after medical grade masks were donated with the assistance of The Solidarity Fund to the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Health on June 15. The donation, at a cost of just under R10-million, is the result of a “truly collaborative effort” across the global Mondi network, the company states. KwaZulu-Natal Health MEC Nomagugu Simelane-Zulu says the FFP3/N95 respiratory masks are in high demand because they are designed to protect medical staff when caring for patients known or suspected to be infected with the newly identified infectious respiratory virus. She confirms that the masks will be distributed to public hospitals across the province over the coming weeks. “Mondi is committed to playing our part in the supply of essential products during the Covid-19 outbreak in South Africa.  We hope that this donation will help provide much needed protective face masks to health authorities in KwaZulu-Natal. We want to help protect healthcare workers and curb the spread of the virus among vulnerable communities,” says Mondi South Africa CEO Viv McMenamin. The donation is one of many ways that Mondi has been supporting its employees, customers, suppliers and communities in and around its operations in the region. Other initiatives include offering further assistance to small business suppliers through the company’s small business development arm, Mondi Zimela, as well as rolling out its Masidle (Let’s eat) programme in collaboration with Mondi employees and nonprofit organisations to deliver food parcels to vulnerable households in local communities. Further, it has also contributed to the supply of medical supplies and equipment, including medical masks and gloves, sanitiser and digital thermometers, to 14 mobile health clinics and 48 other health facilities. Mondi funds nine of these mobile clinics, which have been operating in rural KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga provinces for several years as part of a partnership with the Provincial Departments of Health and other stakeholders.