Finance Minister Tito Mboweni announced grim revisions to the 2020/21 fiscal framework when presenting his Covid-19-induced ‘Supplementary Budget’ speech on Wednesday, in which he likened the country’s rising debt profile to that of a hippopotamus “eating our children’s inheritance”. South Africa’s total consolidated Budget spending, including debt-service costs, would exceed R2-trillion for the first time ever in 2020/21, while revenue would slump to R1.12-trillion, or R300-million below the R1.43-trillion forecast outlined in February. Mboweni said the consolidated Budget deficit would surge to R761.7-billion, or 15.7% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2020/21; a sharp deterioration from the R370.5-billion, or 6.8% of GDP, figure provided in February. The main Budget deficit was projected to be 14.6% of GDP. “Our early projection is that gross national debt will be close to R4-trillion, or 81.8% of GDP by the end of this fiscal year. This is compared to an estimate of R3.56-trillion, or 65.6%  of GDP, projected in February.” Mboweni described debt as the country’s weakness, warning that too much debt had already been accumulated, while Covid-19 would force government to take on yet more. “This year, out of every rand that we pay in tax, 21 cents goes to paying the interest on our past debts,” the Minister noted, cautioning that such indebtedness condemned South Africa to ever higher interest rates. “Our Herculean task is to close the mouth of the hippopotamus! It is eating our children’s inheritance. We need to stop it now!” Mboweni said that, without external support, the government borrowings would consume almost all of the country’s yearly domestic savings, leaving no scope for investment or borrowing by anyone else. “For this reason, we need to access new sources of funding,” he said, revealing that government intended borrowing about $7-billion from international finance institutions to support the pandemic response. “We must make no mistake, these are still borrowings. They are not a source of revenue. They must be paid back.” The deterioration in the fiscal framework outlined by the Minister would arise in a context of far weaker growth, with Mboweni confirming a marked downward revision to government's growth expectations in light of the Covid-19 pandemic and the lockdown instituted in response. The National Treasury expects that the economy will contract by 7.2% in 2020, which would be the largest contraction in nearly 90 years. In February, the National Treasury estimated that the economy would expand by 0.9% in 2020, 1.3% in 2021 and 1.6% in 2022. The revised growth forecast is in line with projections provided by the South African Reserve Bank, but is more favourable than forecasts being provided by many private economists and business, which believe that South Africa could contract by between 8% and 10% this year.