JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Coal-mining company Wescoal on Monday voluntarily updated shareholders on its operations, strategic projects and milestones as well as its quarterly production and sales figures from its operating assets. Wescoal stated that it was in the process of finalising its results for the year ended March 31 and expected a headline earnings per share (HEPS) loss for the year of between 30c and 36c and an earnings per share (EPS) loss of between 30c a share and 36c a share. The JSE-listed company stated in a stock exchange news service announcement that it had developed a Covid-19 response plan involving all operations deveoping standard operating procedures (SOPs) and codes of practice (COPs) in line with national legislation. All business units had developed business continuity plans and quarantine facilities had been secured for employees who do not have facilities to self-isolate. To date there were no reported and no confirmed cases at any of Wescoal’s sites. Wescoal's current strategic priorities remained operational optimisation and scale-up primarily through the development of organic opportunities. Trollope Mining Services has been appointed the boxcut contract miner at the Moabsvelden greenfield project The contractor mobilisation and site establishment commenced during the month of June 2020, including early-works infrastructure construction activities involving access road, perimeter fencing, mine entrance and offices. Accordingly, boxcut construction will commence on 1 July 2020. The first coal and delivery to Eskom is scheduled for early calendar H1 2021 (previously H2 2020), ramping up to full target production volume of 200 000 t/m per of run-of-mine (ROM) over 18 months. Moabsvelden is the mining division's key ‘greenfield' development that will supply Kusile power station for a period of around 10 years, ultimately with around three-million tons of coal a year. The capital expenditure (capex) for the first phase of mine development, being the box cut development and auxiliary infrastructure to start mining operations and produce a ROM product in early calendar H1 2021 – phase 1 – is between R250-million and R290-million. The capex for the second phase to take the project to steady state of 200 000 tons per month of ROM production in early calendar H1 2022, inclusive of a coal handling and processing plant – phase 2 – is expected to be similar to that of phase 1, with a significant portion of this funded by third party plant contractors for the crush and screen (C&S) as well as coal handling and preparation plant. Thus, at the conclusion of phases 1 and 2 in 18 months, Moabsvelden will be able to supply two-million to 2.1-million tons of coal a year to Eskom. In order to reach the full Eskom contractual supply of three-million tons of coal sales a year, the third and final phase of the project will be required, and this will involve the development of VG6 underground project – phase 3. Timing and incremental capex for phase 3 will be confirmed in due course. The gross profitability of the Moabsvelden project per ton of saleable coal product is expected as a minimum to match that of current operations on a normalised basis. In addition, the project promises attractive returns well above the average cost of capital which would enhance shareholder value. Further optimisation work is in progress to reduce the capex spend by revising development schedules and assessing infrastructure sharing opportunities with neighbouring operations. Arnot coal mine is on track to commence production activities during H2 2020, which were previously expected H1 2020. Eskom's response on the coal supply tender for Arnot power station submitted in April 2019 is still pending. Management continues to engage Eskom and the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy on rehabilitation cost settlement terms. Arnot has resources of 190-million tons of coal and the operation is positioned to supply coal directly to Eskom's Arnot power station primarily by a belt conveyor system, with other markets for coal are also being considered. Both Vanggatfontein and Khanyisa mines are being extended to replace current mining pits. As previously reported Khanyisa Triangle, acquired during 2019, was extended with the opening of a new boxcut on the Triangle 2 area, a low strip ratio area where the first coal was reached in March 2020 within four weeks from the start, ahead of schedule and within capex budget range. Triangle 2 will soon replace both Triangle 1 and Catwalk pits as the single producing pit in Khanyisa towards the end of this financial year. Extension of Vanggatfontein and the opening of pit 5 box-cut is well advanced, the first coal was extracted during February 2020 within capex budget range. The project is being pursued as a joint development with a neighboring mining right holder, which will further enable extraction of some 450 000 tons boundary pillar coal that would otherwise have been sterilised. This pit will replace VG3 pit, which is nearing the end of its life, to maintain current production levels at Vanggatfontein. PRODUCTION AND SALES Group coal production of 1 808 000 t is 27% higher than the comparable quarter ending March 2019 and 23% higher when compared to the immediately preceding quarter which had been affected by unprecedented rainfall interrupting production. Various initiatives at Vanggatfontein resulted in attaining 80% of target production rate by March 2020. These included a new fleet of primary earth-moving equipment and access to multiple and increased coal face lengths. The production of 828 000 tons ROM during Q4FY20 was an improvement of 33% on the preceding quarter and production of 2HFY20 (1 449 000 t) and more than double that of 1H FY20 (749 000 t). The Vanggatfontein mine pit reconfiguration is largely completed and development of the new Vanggatfontein pit 5 delivered 92 000 t during development phase in the three months to March 31. Elandspruit opencast production increased 39% on the comparable quarter ending March 2019 and 26% on the immediately preceding quarter. This was due to optimization of the mine pit configuration by increasing the coal face length and through the deployment of additional equipment to increase the production rate. The underground section of Elandspruit is expected to resume production during 2HFY21. Khanyisa operation after downtime in December due to flooding, achieved full capacity production in March 2020. However, the quarter was 16% lower than the preceding quarter and 33% lower than comparable quarter ending March 2019. Mining segment coal sales volume for FY20 at 5 554 000 tons was an increase of 13% or 659 000 tons (FY19: 4 895 000 t Sales volume for the Q4FY20 at 1 488 000 t increased by 9% or 120 000 tons on the comparable quarter Q4FY19 and 1% on the preceding quarter. On a Group level the additional sales were offset by lower volumes from Khanyisa mine during the ramp-up period following excessive rains during December 2019 having resulted in the flooding of mining pits. Trading sales were significantly below customary levels due to continued adverse market conditions. International coal prices declined materially resulting in oversupply and an increasingly challenging domestic coal sales market. In addition, sales to a key private energy generation client were significantly lower than in previous years. TRADING STATEMENT Wescoal said group profitability for FY20 had been significantly impacted by the effect of several factors, which had resulted in significant losses during FY20, in particular at Vanggatfontein. Through various initiatives, Vanggatfontein achieved 80% of target production rate by March 2020, following several months of below break-even production levels. A number of capex projects were also undertaken during the year to improve productivity such as new equipment acquisition, and parallel and increased coal face length access development, pre-stripping and moving workshop infrastructure. Elandspruit achieved record production rate for FY20 (during Q4) despite geological conditions having required more overburden and an increasing amount of hard material to be moved at a significant additional cost of R60-million when compared to FY19. Each of Wescoal’s operations were significantly impacted as previously reported by unprecedented rainfall resulting in lower production and sales volumes. Khanyisa volumes were most severely impacted when both mining pits were completely flooded during December 2019. This coincided with labour action resulting in production downtime of four weeks in January 2020. Production ramp-up efficiency ensured that capacity was restored to 100% by March 2020. The overall impact of much lower sales during the two-month period December 2019 to January 2020, accounted for the majority of losses suffered during the second half. LIQUIDITY AND COST SAVINGS Despite significant headwinds and the downturn in profitability, the Company was able to maintain a positive cash generation from operations with earnings expected to be R300-million. Long-term funding secured during June 2019 improved the capital structure and funded significant investment on the extension and improvement of Vanggatfontein and Khanyisa operations. Whilst debt covenants were under pressure as a result of operational performance, the lenders confirmed continued support and the funding facilities present sufficient headroom for operational needs and for current development projects. Capex budget is being reviewed to defer non-essential spend and projects are being optimised to further reduce capex where possible. In addition, a cost saving exercise is being undertaken across the group, in particular focusing on bulk procurement initiatives with mining contractors, supply chain efficiencies and a review of overhead structures at the corporate offices in Woodmead and Isando. Economic conditions, dynamics in the mining sector in general and more recently the effects of the Covid-19 lockdown present an increasingly challenging environment. Wescoal is monitoring closely the impact of Covid-19 on sales volumes with certain offtake levels slightly lower during May and June 2020, due to low energy demand and slow economic activity startup. This is expected to normalise as the economy increasingly opens up during July. During Q4 FY20 operations were stabilized and ROM production rates continuously increased, mainly from Vanggatfontein and Khanyisa with the production of 1 808 000 t during Q4FY20 showing an increase of 23% on Q3FY20 (1 475 000 t). Thus, having closed Q4 FY20 at 98% of Group target monthly production rate, sustaining production at this level is expected to deliver a ROM figure of eight-million tons a year. All operations are running at target run rates, with an average of two weeks of ROM and product stockpiles. Extending the Vanggatfontein and Khanyisa operations, the box-cut phases of both Vanggatfontein pit 5 and of Triangle pit 2 are underway with completion scheduled during 1H FY21. These extensions will see the Group maintaining its ROM figure of eight-million tons. In addition, the Moabsvelden development is being initiated and the box-cut phase is expected to be completed during 1HFY22, similarly coal production during the box-cut phase will gradually ramp up during the rest of FY21. Wescoal expects to release its interim results on July 21. To attend the virtual presentation, shareholder can email IR@singular.co.za