Ericsson, Sony Network Communications Europe and Telenor Connexion are collaborating to enhance intelligent real-time location, tracking and monitoring solutions for different sectors using the Internet of Things (IoT). The trio are leveraging Telenor's network, Ericsson’s IoT Accelerator for global connectivity and Sony's smart IoT services to enhance tracking, which increases mobility and improves reliability and efficiency for industries ranging from cargo to IoT healthcare devices for patients. “As the use of cellular technology matures, this can have a positive impact on the future of mobile health services and the safety and welfare of end-users,” said Sony Network Communications Europe director and head of wearable platform department Anders Strömberg. Sony Network Communications Europe focuses on connectivity solutions and offers IoT cellular platforms such as Visilion and mSafety, providing cellular connectivity and wearable tracking devices. Sony’s Visilion platform include use cases for the logistics and healthcare sectors where sensors can provide information about the real-time position of anything that is connected. “Locating valuable hospital equipment with healthcare IoT tracking devices such as ECG machines and hospital beds, knowing where nursing staff and patients are in the hospital, can save time and improve resource allocation,” he explained. Similarly, the mSafety platform comes with user-friendly wearables that can be used in the healthcare, wellness or safety sector. “Wearables can be used to monitor users and provide information about health data such as body temperature and heart rate, track location and send alert notifications in case of an emergency,” he continued. Ericsson's IoT connectivity and device management platform IoT Accelerator will provide enterprises with a unified solution that manages IoT operations of any scale, using worldwide mobile network infrastructure. “Ericsson IoT Accelerator can liberate our partners' IoT solutions and services to scale globally and deliver value to end-users,” said Ericsson IoT head Kiva Allgood. The Ericsson IoT Accelerator ecosystem hosts more than 35 service providers across more than 100 countries. The service also currently enables reliable, scalable and secure connectivity management of IoT devices to more than 5 000 enterprises globally, with more than 50-million devices onboarded on to the platform, including over three-million eSIMs. “We are proud to be a long term partner of forward-thinking companies like Sony Network Communications Europe and to support their business growth and future IoT products and services,” concludes Telenor Connexion CEO Mats Lundquist.