Cape Town-based subsea engineering expert, MMO, a Unique Group company, has completed beta-testing of its inhouse-designed Uni-Life 100, a non-invasive positive pressure ventilation system. Developed using the technical expertise and production support of Unique Group, the system has been specifically created to aid African authorities in their efforts to provide mass treatment to patients across the continent who are displaying Covid-19-related symptoms, says the company. MMO MD and Unique Group Africa operations director Rodney McKechnie says MMO forms part of the South African government’s national ventilator project, which aims to increase the number of ventilators available in the national health pool. Among other activities, the Unique Group manufactures and supplies diving and hyperbaric medical systems. MMO is its broad-based black economic empowerment entity. With an initial production batch of 10 000 units planned, the Uni-Life 100 system provides a cost-effective solution that can be mass produced as a lightweight, modular and rapidly distributed alternative to other ventilator systems available, promises MMO. The system uses continuous positive airway pressure architecture, incorporating a compact gas blending and supply system which provides a therapeutic mixture of air and enriched oxygen, adjusted to a patient’s requirements. The system includes an inflatable, transparent vinyl hood which is placed over the patient’s head, thereby allowing them to easily breathe the therapeutic air. McKechnie says MMO is in the midst of the application process for all the necessary medical and regulatory approvals required for the ventilator. The target market for the production includes governments, the private health sector as well as export markets. “We are proud to have locally designed and tested the compact Uni-Life 100 positive pressure ventilating system, and we are now ready to mass produce,” says McKechnie. “Through our life support and hyperbaric medical equipment, we have been committed to saving lives globally. “The system bolsters our efforts in supporting measures to collaborate on and further develop this critical treatment system to meet current demands. “I would like to convey my thanks to the team which has worked tirelessly to complete the timely production of the first batch of these units amid the appropriate restrictions and social distancing requirements as mandated by the South African government,” says McKechnie. The Uni-Life 100 will be produced at the Unique Group’s Cape Town manufacturing facility. The local content is more than 50%, says McKechnie.