Commonwealth secretary-general Patricia Scotland urges governments to ensure their countries’ post-Covid-19 economic recoveries are environmentally sustainable and safe for the ocean. She also asks that they reform their development of strategies in a way that supports vibrant and sustainable “blue and green” economies. Forty-seven of the Commonwealth’s 54 member countries have a coastline, while 25 are either small island developing States or big ocean States relying heavily on the ocean for food and income. She explains that the ocean is the “life blood” of so many Commonwealth countries and, therefore, the environment should be the cornerstone as countries put plans in place to recover their economies. The Commonwealth covers more than a third of coastal oceans in the world, contributing to an international ocean-based economy valued at $3-trillion to $6-trillion a year. Scotland states that the impact of Covid-19 has radically altered some of the world’s key economic sectors and transformed the way people live, communicate and do business. “While the fallout from the pandemic has had a huge impact on our blue economies, it also presents a crucial opportunity to strategise on how to accelerate the transition towards more sustainable economic practices built on climate resilience and ocean sustainability.” In this regard, the Commonwealth Blue Charter is one of the most effective platforms for global ocean action in the international landscape currently, the organisation states. She commends the work of Commonwealth member countries through the action groups and welcomes the support received from national, regional and global partners. This effort, says Scotland, enables the Commonwealth to mobilise together for ocean health. The Blue Charter is the Commonwealth’s commitment to work together to protect the ocean and meet global ocean commitments. Ten action groups, led by 13 champion countries, are driving the flagship initiative. More than 40 countries have signed up to one or more of these action groups. Commonwealth Blue Charter action groups include Sustainable Aquaculture (led by Cyprus), Sustainable Blue Economy (Kenya), Coral Reef Protection and Restoration (Australia, Belize and Mauritius), Mangrove Ecosystems and Livelihoods (Sri Lanka), Ocean Acidification (New Zealand), Ocean and Climate Change (Fiji), Ocean Observations (Canada), Commonwealth Clean Ocean Alliance (marine plastic pollution – the UK and Vanuatu), Marine Protected Areas (Seychelles) and Sustainable Coastal Fisheries (Kiribati). Members of the private sector, academia and civil society – including Vulcan, Bloomberg Philanthropies, the Association of Commonwealth Universities, Nekton Foundation and many others – are also engaged as Blue Charter partners.