Sedibeng Water is successfully progressing implementation of Drought Relief and Covid-19 Intervention Projects in the Maluti-a-Phofung local municipality since its appointment in February. The Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) mandated Sedibeng Water to fix the water crisis in Maluti-a-Phofung and simultaneously stimulate employment creation opportunities for local small business entities and communities. The primary mandate included the provision of 2 000 water tanks; the rehabilitation and equipping of boreholes for the harvesting of groundwater; the rehabilitation and maintenance of the current water infrastructure; and the provision of technical support for the construction of new water infrastructure. The Technical Project Monitoring Committee under Sedibeng Water established formal relationships with the Office of the Executive Mayor, Infrastructure Development MMC and Maluti-a-Phofung local municipality MMCs for the smooth running of the consultation and implementation of the intervention projects. Sedibeng Water appointed contractors to provide services to expedite the implementation of the drought relief projects and, as part of the 30% local beneficiation guidelines, Osher Fuels has directly subcontracted various community-based entities to assist with the distribution of water tanks and the construction of stands for the placement and installation of the water tanks. Community members who own a van or truck are compensated a fixed amount for transportation for each tank or load. Further, the construction of stands have been subcontracted to about 35 local small business enterprises or to ward committees that use members of the community within their wards to build the stands for their allocated water tanks in their ward. “This approach has created jobs for local community members at a rate of five labourers a stand, for a total of 500 stands to date,” Sedibeng Water said in a statement, noting that a robust quality assurance routine is conducted to check the quality of the stands constructed by the subcontractors, before payment is processed. Working together with MAP Water, 12 local labourers were employed to deal with water leaks and the fixing of bursts. About 75 local labourers were outsourced for the construction of major projects like the Uniqwa reversal pipeline project, while 12 Maluti-a-Phofung Water call centre agents and 12 Maluti-a-Phofung Water provision survey volunteers were provided training in communication skills, media monitoring skills, interview skills for the water provision satisfaction survey, design of digital surveys, social media marketing, event planning and management as well as public relations skills. The water provision satisfaction survey is designed to provide a community engagement opportunity for the local community to provide regular feedback on their satisfaction level with regard to the improvement of the intervention project. The results of the survey will be made available weekly and monthly as a performance barometer of the impact of the DWS Drought Relief and Covid-19 Intervention Project. “Working collaboratively with the various stakeholders like Maluti-a-Phofung Water and Maluti-a-Phofung municipality, civic organisations like the Harrismith Water Heroes and Water Crisis, as well as with the broader community, has assisted Sedibeng Water greatly to alleviate undue project delays and positioned the project on a trajectory towards successful completion within schedule.” The Technical Project Monitoring Committee submits daily and weekly project progress reports to the Free State DWS and weekly and monthly reports to the Ministry of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation.