Following two months of hard lockdown in response to the Covid-19 pandemic, the development of a 2 047-bed student village at the University of Fort Hare (UFH), in the Eastern Cape, has resumed this week. Lack of accommodation for students is one of the biggest challenges faced at UFH, with residences at the university’s Alice campus barely able to accommodate 50% of the student population. With this project, the university aims to house 65% of students on campus, as well as provide a new student centre and a dedicated postgraduate accommodation block. “This is the largest student accommodation development ever undertaken by a university in South Africa. Its completion is critical to easing the housing crisis at the University of Fort Hare and giving students access to resources necessary for academic success,” says Student Accommodation Group (Stag) African director Sean Kenealy. Stag African is responsible for the development. Kenealy believes the reopening of the construction sector in lockdown alert level 3 will also play a major role in cushioning the impact of lockdown-related unemployment. “The construction and property development industries are major economic contributors – they have the potential to employ large numbers of workers very quickly. Given the current state of our economy, this is something that government and business should prioritise moving forward,” he comments. Following weeks of preparation and the implementation of strict health and safety measures in accordance with Level 3 regulations, the UFH construction site has been declared Covid-19-protocol compliant. Physical distancing, the use of face masks and continued education are among the measures being taken to prevent the spread of the virus, and ensure the safety of construction workers, says Stag African UFH project manager Nangamso Cetywayo. Phase one of the project, completed in 2014, resulted in the availability of 610 additional for university students. A further 854 beds have been completed in phase two, which is funded by the Department of Higher Education and Training, the Development Bank of Southern Africa and the European Union and valued at over R400-million. Completion of the project in December 2020 will bring the total number of beds handed over to the university to 2 047.