JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Coal-mining company Wescoal on Monday voluntarily updated shareholders on its operations, strategic projects and milestones as well as its quarterly production and sales figures from its operating assets. Wescoal stated in a stock exchange news service announcement that it was in the process of finalising its results for the year ended March 31 and expected a headline earnings per share (HEPS) loss for the year of between 30c and 36c and an earnings per share (EPS) loss of between 30c a share and 36c a share. The JSE-listed company stated that it had developed a Covid-19 response plan involving all operations developing standard operating procedures (SOPs) and codes of practice (COPs) in line with national legislation. All business units had developed business continuity plans and quarantine facilities had been secured for employees who did not have facilities to self-isolate. To date, there had been no reported and no confirmed cases at any Wescoal site. Wescoal's current strategic priorities remained optimisation of operations and scale-up primarily through the development of organic opportunities. The company reported that Trollope Mining Services had been appointed its boxcut contract mining company at the Moabsvelden greenfield project. Trollope's mobilisation and site establishment during the month of June included the construction of access road, perimeter fencing, mine entrance and offices, with boxcut construction scheduled to begin on July 1. The first coal delivery to Eskom had been extended to the early part of next year (H1 2021) and not the second half of this year (H2 2020) as previously scheduled. Ramp up to full target production of 200 000 t/m per of run-of-mine (ROM) would take place thereafter of 18 months. Describing Moabsvelden as the key ‘greenfield' development of its mining division's, Wescoal said that Moabsvelden would supply coal to Eskom's new Kusile power station for 10 years, ultimately with around three-million tons of coal a year. The capital expenditure (capex) of between R250-million and R290-million would be required for the first phase of mine development, including boxcut development and auxiliary infrastructure to start mining operations and produce a ROM product in early H1 2021. The capex for the second phase is expected to be similar to the capex for the first phase. The second phase will take the project to steady state of 200 000 t/m of ROM production in early H1 2022, inclusive of a coal handling and processing plant, with a significant portion of the second phase funded by third party plant contractors for the crushing and screening, as well as coal handling and preparation plant. At the conclusion of the first and second phases in 18 months, Moabsvelden would then be able to supply two-million tons to 2.1-million tons of coal a year to Eskom. To reach the full contractual supply to Eskom of three-million tons of coal sales a year, the required third and final phase of the project would involve the development of the VG6 underground mine. The timeframe and the incremental capex required for the third phase would be confirmed in due course. Wescoal stated that the project promised attractive returns above the average cost of capital. Meanwhile, further optimisation work was in progress to reduce the capex spend by revising development schedules and assessing infrastructure sharing opportunities with neighbouring operations. Wescoal stated that the Arnot coal mine would now commence production activities during H2 2020, andnot in the first half of this year, as previously expected. H1 2020. Still pending was Eskom's response on the coal supply tender for Arnot power station submitted in April last year. The company said that its management was continuing to engage Eskom and the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy on rehabilitation cost settlement terms. Arnot had, it added, resources of 190-million tons of coal and was positioned to supply coal directly to Eskom's Arnot power station primarily by belt conveyor, with other markets for coal also being considered. Both Vanggatfontein and Khanyisa mines were being extended to replace current mining pits. Acquired last year, Khanyisa Triangle had been extended with the opening of a new boxcut on the low-strip-ratio Triangle 2 area, where the first coal was reached ahead of schedule and within budget range in March. Triangle 2 would, towards the end of this financial year, replace both Triangle 1 and Catwalk pits as the single producing pit in Khanyisa. Extension of Vanggatfontein and the opening of pit 5 boxcut was advanced, with the first coal extracted in February within capex budget range. The project was being pursued as a joint development with a neighboring mining right holder, which will further enable extraction of some 450 000 tons boundary pillar coal that would otherwise have been sterilised. This pit will replace VG3 pit, which is nearing the end of its life, to maintain current production levels at Vanggatfontein. PRODUCTION AND SALES Wescoal reported that group coal production of 1 808 000 t was 27% up on the corresponding quarter ending March 2019 and 23% up on the preceding quarter, which had been affected by unprecedented rainfall interrupting production. A new fleet of primary earthmoving equipment and access to multiple and increased face lengths at Vanggatfontein resulted in 80% of targeted production being attained. The production of 828 000 t ROM during the last quarter of this financial year (Q4FY20) was an improvement of 33% on the preceding quarter and production of 2HFY20 (1 449 000 t) and more than double that of 1H FY20 (749 000 t). The Vanggatfontein mine pit reconfiguration, the company said, was  largely completed and development of the new Vanggatfontein pit 5 delivered 92 000 t during development phase in the three months to March 31. Elandspruit opencast production increased 39% on the corresponding quarter of last year and 26% on the immediately preceding quarter, owing to increased face length and the deployment of additional equipment to increase the production rate. The underground section of Elandspruit was expected to resume production during 2HFY21, Mining Weekly can report. After downtime in December owing to flooding, Khanyisa achieved full capacity production in March 2020, but its quarterly production was 16% lower than the preceding quarter and 33% lower than last year's corresponding quarter. Mining segment coal sales for FY20 was 13% higher at 5 554 000 t and sales for the Q4FY20 9% higher at 1 488 000 t. At group level, the additional sales were offset by lower volumes from Khanyisa, which was impacted by heavy December flooding. Trading sales were significantly below customary levels owing to continued adverse market conditions. International coal prices declined materially, resulting in oversupply and an increasingly challenging domestic coal sales market. In addition, sales to a key private energy generation client were significantly lower than in previous years. TRADING STATEMENT Wescoal said group profitability for FY20 had been significantly impacted, resulting in significant losses during FY20, particularly at Vanggatfontein, where several months of production were below break-even levels. Elandspruit achieved record production for FY20 despite geological conditions requiring more overburden and increased hard material needing to be moved at a significant additional cost of R60-million when compared to FY19. The flooding of Khanyisa's pits coincided with labour action resulting in production downtime of four weeks in January but production ramp-up efficiency ensuring 100% capacity restoration by March. Much lower sales in December and January resulted in most of the second half losses. LIQUIDITY AND COST SAVINGS Despite significant headwinds and the downturn in profitability, positive cash generation from operations was maintained with earnings expected to be R300-million. Long-term funding secured last year improved the capital structure and funded significant investment on the extension and improvement of Vanggatfontein and Khanyisa operations. Whilst debt covenants were under pressure as a result of operational performance, the lenders confirmed continued support and the funding facilities present sufficient headroom for operational needs and for current development projects. Capex budget is being reviewed to defer non-essential spend and projects are being optimised to further reduce capex where possible. In addition, a cost saving exercise is being undertaken across the group, in particular focusing on bulk procurement initiatives with mining contractors, supply chain efficiencies and a review of overhead structures at the corporate offices in Woodmead and Isando. Economic conditions, dynamics in the mining sector in general and more recently the effects of the Covid-19 lockdown present an increasingly challenging environment. Wescoal is monitoring closely the impact of Covid-19 on sales volumes with certain offtake levels slightly lower during May and June 2020, due to low energy demand and slow economic activity startup. This is expected to normalise as the economy increasingly opens up during July. During Q4 FY20 operations were stabilized and ROM production rates continuously increased, mainly from Vanggatfontein and Khanyisa with the production of 1 808 000 t during Q4FY20 showing an increase of 23% on Q3FY20 (1 475 000 t). Thus, having closed Q4 FY20 at 98% of Group target monthly production rate, sustaining production at this level is expected to deliver a ROM figure of eight-million tons a year. All operations are running at target run rates, with an average of two weeks of ROM and product stockpiles. Extending the Vanggatfontein and Khanyisa operations, the box-cut phases of both Vanggatfontein pit 5 and of Triangle pit 2 are underway with completion scheduled during 1H FY21. These extensions will see the Group maintaining its ROM figure of eight-million tons. In addition, the Moabsvelden development is being initiated and the box-cut phase is expected to be completed during 1HFY22, similarly coal production during the box-cut phase will gradually ramp up during the rest of FY21. Wescoal expects to release its interim results on July 21. To attend the virtual presentation, shareholder can email IR@singular.co.za