Rand Water has progressed its mandate under a memorandum of understanding (MoU) with the Department of Basic Education (DBE) and the Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) to provide water to 3 126 schools across South Africa. The scope of the MoU, finalised on May 13 with the potable water intervention funds transferred to Rand Water on May 26, comprises the supply of water tanks, the installation of the water tanks with the related reticulation system and the supply of water tankers. “Our approach was to ready schools with existing tanks by filling those tanks with water and to provide tanks to those schools without tanks,” said Rand Water in a statement. “We have already made significant progress, and are confident that we are on target to meet the necessary deadlines for the commissioning of the potable water infrastructure at all the schools.” Rand Water has capacitated 354 schools, while 1 320 new tanks are in transit to schools, with 522 already allocated at a central area within the provinces ready for distribution to schools. Some 582 new temporal stands have been constructed, of which 269 have tanks. About 313 tanks will be installed by June 2. This forms part of the national return to school programme and to ensure safe and clean water for those school communities in need. “We have a long-standing commitment to serving our communities that now includes partnering with government in the fight against Covid-19. We have heeded the call by President Cyril Ramaphosa for increased partnerships, solidarity, collaboration and the sharing of knowledge and experience to fight the pandemic,” Rand Water continued. Since the establishment by the DWS of a national Covid-19 Command Centre for Water and Sanitation at Rand Water at the end of March, it has successfully distributed and installed 7 594 tanks in water-stressed communities throughout South Africa. “We intend to use our technical expertise and the experience gained since then to now partner with the DBE and school communities with the distribution and installation of water tanks in schools throughout the country where no handwashing facilities exist,” it said. Rand Water also plans to assist the DBE in helping learners understand the benefits of handwashing through educational and behavioural tools and practices where necessary.