Business, commerce and industry will increasingly use the Internet of Things (IoT) to provide visibility of assets and production, support digital channels to market and create a clear online presence, says industrial networking and IoT firm SqwidNet MD Phathizwe Malinga. The first step is to ensure the business' go-to-market channel is digital, accessible and ready for the customer, he points out. "Companies have to change their offerings to suit the new normal; restaurants are delivering takeaway while brick and mortar retail outlets need online stores. Innovation is critical for businesses to ensure they can withstand the current environment," he says. Digitisation has become critical, in terms of production and the product. This will generate data that can be used to improve decision-making and even alert when something goes wrong. This can expand into the use of algorithms that can be used to determine the best times for delivery and the best person to handle the delivery, among many other uses, he emphasises. This requires increasing remote visibility into assets, empowering staff to make the right decisions at the right time and helping the organisation to react to unexpected changes. Digital channels can also be adapted as the lockdown levels change; companies can adapt their approach depending on what level of trade they are allowed to conduct. "IoT’s role in this market and dynamic is variable. For the healthcare sector, it can provide near real-time tracking of essential personal protective equipment levels, ventilators and patients to ensure ongoing care. "In the retail sector, it can be used to improve customer experiences in online shopping. IoT can track parcels, ensure accurate deliveries, and consistently update customers on their status. This level of customer delight is long overdue and there is no time like the present to become the company that reshapes customer expectations," Malinga notes. As companies become increasingly digitally capable, they will discover aggressive advertising directed at customers, which means they need a clear value proposition. "Information, technology and applications have become ubiquitous and accessible, and can be used by organisations of any size to shift gears and change direction. It does not require a big budget or large investment, but rather an astute adaptation of technology to become agile and ensure relevance," avers Malinga. Companies want to build foundations that are capable of weathering the new normal and business models that can evolve and adapt to the future, but organisations face a complex situation that requires agile thinking to ensure survival in uncertain times, he highlights. IoT systems can also help to lower means of production. This is not just about cutting costs, but about re-engineering the business and adapting it to suit the changing markets and needs of customers. Technologies such as IoT can be leveraged to plug the business into vibrant ecosystems, which can help it to manage and outsource work while mitigating bloat, he says.