US-based global aerospace group Boeing has launched a programme to ensure the health and safety of airline passengers and crews, as air travel resumes with the gradual lifting of national lockdowns and travel restrictions imposed around the world to counter the Covid-19 pandemic. Boeing calls this programme the Confident Travel Initiative (CTI). “Boeing is committed to the health of airline passengers and crew,” affirmed Boeing Commercial Airplanes director – product marketing Jim Haas. “We’re working with partners to enhance aircraft cleanliness procedures and to develop common system-wide standards that will be key to a safe experience from curbside to airplane.” The CTI included the evaluation of new technologies and approaches. One of these was the use of ultraviolet (UV) light to disinfect frequently touched surfaces within airliner cabins. The UV light would be radiated on to the surfaces by means of “wands” and this would allow the safe and quick cleaning of such surfaces. Boeing was evaluating off-the-shelf options but was also developing a prototype UV wand. It was additionally examining different UV applications and their viability. The company was going to support the in-service trials of these technologies. Boeing was also testing off-the-shelf anti-microbial paints and assessing off-the-shelf clear spray and anti-viral coatings. Again, these would be for use on high-touch surfaces and points throughout the cabin. Regarding existing methods, the company was increasing its understanding of current best practices regarding disinfectant materials, and sharing that information. It was working with airlines and service providers to evaluate the application of disinfectants, and was gathering feedback on new techniques for disinfecting aircraft cabins and flight decks. Probably the biggest protection for passengers’ health on airliners were the high efficiency particulate air (Hepa) filters used in cabin air recirculation systems. These were fitted on all Boeing airliners and were similar in capability to the air filters used in hospitals. In addition, inside the airliner cabin, air flowed from the ceiling to the floor, and not from the front to the back, which minimised the spread of particulates throughout the cabin. Inside the cabin, air was recirculated once every two or three minutes. The world-renowned Mayo clinic had reported that a Covid-19 particle had an average size of 0.12 microns to 0.125 microns. Hepa filters had been tested against other particles of the same size and had demonstrated an efficiency greater than 99.9%. “As air travel slowly begins to increase and restrictions ease around the globe, the health and safety of flight crews and the flying public remains our top priority,” assured Boeing president and CEO David Calhoun. “This effort will help ensure flying is even safer in the future than it is today.”