The Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) has revised the regulations governing the procedural requirements for water-use licence applications and appeals to finalise water-use licence applications within a 90-day period. “The business processes of water-use licensing have been revised and significant progress has been made,” the department said in a statement on June 19, noting that the previous regulations prescribed 300 days for process finalisation. This followed President Cyril Ramaphosa’s declaration in his State of the Nation Address in February that water-use licences should have a turnaround time of 90 days, effective April 1. The new DWS processes include pre-application engagement with the applicant, compilation of the required technical reports and public participation. Accepted applications are assessed and a decision is made within 82 days, with the final four days reserved for post administration of the decision, such as a letter of rejection or the issue of a licence. “The revised time frame for the finalisation of the water-use licence application process will ensure that DWS is an active and responsible participant within the economic and social sectors, with a particular impact on the recovery of the South African economy. The shortened time frame will bring certainty to all applicants and users,” said Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu. Various stakeholders in the water and economic sectors, including agriculture, forestry, domestic, industry and mining, are also actively engaged and involved in the process to fast-track the process. There have been continuous engagements with different stakeholders, State-owned entities and individual mining houses around water-use licensing processes. “As the department, we have engaged organisations like Forestry South Africa, Minerals Council, Pulp and Paper South Africa to discuss matters around water use licensing business processes and progress of the water use licence applications," DWS regulation deputy director-general Anil Singh concluded.