Industry organisation Business for South Africa (B4SA), working with partners, is providing businesses in the informal sector a set of easy-to-use return to work resources to help guide them on how to operate within the new requirements for health and safety amid the Covid-19 pandemic. B4SA has published a set of six guidelines covering fast food outlets, home services, small retail, mobile sellers, Internet cafés and auto services in the informal sector. The guidelines and tools can be found at https://www.return2work.co.za/informal-sectors/ and are being provided in other accessible formats for informal sector businesses. The return to work resources offer businesses a safe, effective and structured plan with mandatory and recommended guidelines for the workplace and daily business operations. “The extended reopening of the economy under enhanced Level 3 in a phased and risk adjusted manner is a welcome move as it allows more people the capacity to earn and restore their livelihoods. "As more businesses are allowed to operate and more people return to work, we need to ensure that businesses of all sizes and formats operate in a responsible manner so that all are kept safe and businesses remain open,” says B4SA CEO and co-convenor Cas Coovadia. The return to work guidelines and protocols call for businesses to implement and practice stringent health and hygiene measures, besides others, in the workplace for the protection of themselves, their employees, suppliers and customers. This includes educating staff on how to use personal protective equipment and encouraging its consistent use, the regular washing of hands and ensuring customers practice physical distancing. Safe transportation guidelines for employees taking public transport are also outlined. Guidelines for businesses trading in the informal sector were developed with national and local informal sector industry associations representing spaza stores; homes services such as electricians and plumbers; open markets and transport ranks; hawkers and mobile-sellers. The guidelines are informed by South African realities with the recognition that they may need to be adjusted according to specific conditions.