Global telecommunications satellite group Intelsat announced on Saturday that it had launched, on the same rocket, its second mission extension vehicle (MEV-2) and its Galaxy 30 geosynchronous communications satellite. The two spacecraft were launched on an Ariane 5 rocket from the Guiana Space Centre, near Kourou in French Guiana (on the north coast of South America). (The Ariane was developed and is made by European company Arianespace.) Intelsat operates the biggest integrated satellite and terrestrial network in the world. The MEV-2 was developed and manufactured by US aerospace group Northrop Grumman. “[Saturday’s] launch was especially important for Intelsat because Northrop Grumman’s innovative MEV-2 launched alongside Galaxy 30,” reported Intelsat CEO Stephen Spengler. “Intelsat was proud to partner with Northrop Grumman earlier this year to pioneer the future of in-space servicing with MEV-1 and our Intelsat 901 satellite. We’re looking forward to this next exciting servicing mission with Intelsat 10-02.” A MEV extends the life of a geostationary satellite that has nearly exhausted its fuel. The MEV docks with the satellite and then uses its own fuel and thrusters to keep the satellite in its orbit and so able to continue to function. Both MEV-1 and MEV-2 will extend the lives of their respective satellites by five years. At the end of this period the MEVs will lift their satellites into a high graveyard orbit, undock from them, and then manoeuvre to dock with other satellites whose lives need extending. MEV-2 will dock with Intelsat 10-02 next year. This satellite provides broadband and media distribution services to customers in Africa, the Middle East, Europe and South America. Galaxy 30 also represents an advance for Intelsat, as it is the group’s first four-frequency satellite. It will operate in the C-, Ka-, Ku- and L-bands. It is the first satellite launched as part of the company’s Galaxy fleet refresh plan and will enter service early next year, replacing Galaxy 14. The new satellite will support Intelsat’s North American customers and provide broadband, media business, mobility and network services. It will also facilitate the adoption of fifth generation mobile telecommunications technology in the US. It is further carrying a satellite navigation payload for the US Federal Aviation Administration. “[The] launch of Galaxy 30 demonstrates Intelsat’s long-term commitment to our North American media customers,” he affirmed. “At Intelsat, we’re constantly innovating, investing in and upgrading our satellite fleet and terrestrial infrastructure. Galaxy 30 is a great example of how we help our customers stay ahead of evolving consumer demands, today and well into the future.”