100% black women-owned and -managed civil and structural engineering consulting firm Malani Padayachee & Associates (MPA) and investment holding company Motseng Women Investments have acquired 100% equity of Mott MacDonald Africa, the South African engineering entity of Mott MacDonald. MPA will be rebranded as MPAMOT. Malani Padayachee-Saman is CEO of the new entity and Ipeleng Mkhari chairperson. This opportunity presented itself when the transaction parties explored opportunities to expand their market share, seek economies of scale and reshape the industry. Upon realising the synergies between the companies, as well as the shared principles and values that underpin their business practices, the acquisition was the natural next step, the companies note. The transaction provides fivefold growth in capacity and capability, along with the integration of home-grown and global skills, networks and experience, resulting in greater efficiencies that are expected to significantly increase MPAMOT's market share. MPA continued to accelerate investment in services and technology and subsequently has shown a consistent exponential growth trajectory. However as a first mover, seeking opportunities to take the industry forward and having previously considered organic growth, Padayachee-Saman had to consider an acquisition approach. This has been further reinforced by the fact that the impact of the current pandemic will require a responsive approach particularly on infrastructure, with the objective of generating more jobs. “We are pleased by this transaction as it offers endless opportunities for our employees, customers and stakeholders across the sector. It will bring together a collective of exceptional skills and expertise and extensive experience that is expected to make a prominent footprint in the country and the continent. "We believe the combination of a team of well-connected and successful entrepreneurs with a wealth of local and global experience, a highly capable management team, and committed, experienced employees committed to driving the business forward, is a recipe for success,” Mkhari said. “This transaction has taken months of hard work and countless consultations; we are pleased to have finally put pen to paper. The collaboration with Mott MacDonald is assured through sound cooperation agreements. "This represents the growth of MPA and Motseng in the engineering and built environment and expands our horizons beyond our borders in line with our ambition of growth into the African continent. We look forward to providing expanded services for all our current and future clients and the continued growth and development of our excellent teams,” says Padayachee-Saman.