The UK Ministry of Defence (MoD) has awarded a £3-million contract to develop, install and test a hybrid electric drive system on British Army Foxhound and Jackal 4 x 4 light protected vehicles. The contract has been placed with NP Aerospace, a company based in Coventry, England. In this project, NP Aerospace will be working with the UK operation of General Dynamics (the manufacturer of the Foxhound is a subsidiary of the US-based group), British company SC Group (better known by the brand name Supacat and the manufacturer of the Jackal) and Magtec (another UK enterprise, which designs and manufactures electric drive systems for vehicles). Together, they will develop Foxhound and Jackal test bed vehicles to test the technology. The aim of the project is to deliver both military and environmental benefits. The project is designated Technology Demonstrator 6 and forms part of the British Army’s Protected Mobility Engineering and Support (PMETS) programme. NP Aerospace had previously been awarded a £63-million PMETS contract last year, which will run until 2024. Hybrid electrical drive will reduce the noise generated by the vehicles and so make them more difficult to detect. It will also provide increased electrical power onboard the vehicles, allowing them to carry and use latest technology systems, and also to supply electricity to outside or ‘off-board’ systems. Environmentally, the result will be lower carbon emissions, contributing to the British government’s goal of net zero emissions by the year 2050. (Under that overarching goal, the UK MoD has its own ‘NZ50’ net zero emissions programme.) “These tests will ensure our Armed Forces have the latest, safest and most efficient technology, while continuing to support prosperity across the UK,” affirmed Defence Minister (equivalent to Deputy Minister in South Africa) Jeremy Quin. “They represent a potential opportunity to improve our vehicles sustainability and military effectiveness.” “The hybrid electric drive project is a significant development that will further extend the technical capabilities of the vehicles and is an important advancement in the incorporation of new technology,” stated NP Aerospace COO David Petheram. “It will provide a greater understanding of what hybrid technology could achieve, whilst also looking into the future in terms of integrating additional sophisticated electronics across the PMETS vehicle fleet.”