Through a multistakeholder partnership, hospitality, travel and tourism sector lobby organisation, the Tourism Business Council of South Africa (TBCSA), has launched a tourism and hospitality industry Covid-19 assistance mobile application (app) – the Opus4business App. The app is intended to aid in the safe reopening of the industry by training business owners on the safe implementation of the Covid-19 tourism safety protocols. Based on industry-designed tourism protocols, South Africa has received the World Travel and Tourism Council’s (WTTC's) Global Safety Stamp of Approval as a destination. The approval further gave the TBCSA issuing rights to the WTTC Safe Travels stamp, within South Africa. The specially designed stamp enable travellers to recognise governments and businesses around the world which have adopted health and hygiene global standardised protocols for safe travel. The Opus4business App is a quick, easy and paperless way to record compliance with industry protocols by training tourism industry business owners and staff on a Travel Safe – Eat Safe certification programme. Once completed, the certification provides evidence that health screening and cleaning procedures are in place. It also helps businesses seamlessly manage Covid-19 health screening for employees, suppliers, delivery agents and patrons in compliance with the Protection of Personal Information Act, receive industry updates and deploy contact tracing if needed. Travellers are invited to download the app to keep track of safe environments as the industry expects an increase in travel since the reopening of intra-provincial travel for leisure. TBCSA CEO Tshifhiwa Tshivhengwa says the app is yet another way the industry is demonstrating self-regulation and a readiness to open for domestic and international travel in the country. “We are encouraging businesses to download the app and take their teams through the training to increase compliance in the industry and to keep staff and customers in the sector safe.” The TBCSA states that the travel and tourism industry, like many others, has been severely affected by Covid-19. Many businesses have already been exposed to the safety protocols and, as the industry begins to slowly reopen, the TBCSA believes this technology puts safety in the hands of every stakeholder within the tourism value chain, which is an important part of the successful rebuilding of the sector.