The international standard for Occupational Health and Safety (OHSAS) has been replaced with SANS/ISO 45001: Occupational Health and Safety Management System Standard. In a webinar hosted this week by the South African Bureau of Standards (SABS), clients and interested parties were given an overview of the changes and the deadline to migrate from OHSAS 18001 to SANS/ISO 45001. All organisations that are certified to OHSAS 18001, will have to migrate to ISO 45001 by September 2021. The deadline was initially set by the International Accreditation Forum (IAF) for March 2021 but has been extended to September 2021 as a result of the delays experienced worldwide owing to Covid-19. “SANS/ISO 45001 is crucial for all organisations in South Africa as it provides the framework, processes and system for the management of all workplace hazards, health issues and incidents. "The effective implementation of the performance-based standard will reduce the number of fatalities and injuries in the workplace and promote a healthier and happier workforce,” says SABS standards executive Sadhvir Bissoon. Globally, 2.7-million workers die in workplaces each year and the International Labour Organisation estimates that about 340-million non-fatal work-related injuries or illnesses occur each year. The new SANS/ISO 45001 is more comprehensive than the previous OHSAS standard and requires involvement by an entire organisation. “While SANS/ISO 45001 is a voluntary standard, there are some references to the standard included in regulations that have been developed by the Department of Employment and Labour. "Organisations that are certified to OHSAS 18001 should be aware that their certification will no longer be valid by September 2021. "It is important to note that this standard does not replace regulatory requirements, however, an implementation of the management system will enable an organisation to meet most regulations relevant to occupational health and safety,” advises Bissoon. The SABS is assisting its certification clients to ensure the migration process is smooth and that the deadline for migration is met. Training interventions to help prepare South African companies to meet the deadline will continue.