Cassava Fintech International (CFI) and Liquid Telecom Group (LTG) have teamed up to develop a service aimed at accelerating digital and financial inclusion in Africa. Through the newly launched Sasai WiFi Finder, the duo plan to establish an expansive network of data access points across Africa and build ‘Africa’s Missing Network’ by partnering with broadband providers, Internet service providers and local community hubs. The service, which is set to be rolled out across thousands of hotspots across Africa, can be accessed through an intuitive and easy-to-use in-application feature on the Sasai super application, where users can identify hotspots where they can access affordable data. “We designed this service to be as easy-to-use as possible. A smartphone user will get free connectivity on-the-go through accessing the Sasai WiFi Finder network to download the Sasai application and gain access to a wide range of in-application services,” said Sasai COO Tapera Mushoriwa. Upon registering for and opening the Sasai application, an automatic notification pop-up alert will show available Sasai WiFi Finder hotspots nearby. “They also receive additional services, such as distinct indoor and outdoor WiFi hotspot markers, directions to WiFi hotspots, session use, range and signal strength details, making it easier than ever before for African users to access the Internet,” Mushoriwa said. The Sasai WiFi Finder will allow greater connectivity in a variety of locations, including retail, healthcare, education, government and small business trade facilities, as well as access to social, entertainment and on-demand services offered on the Sasai super application, including Sasai Moments, he added. “We see this launch as a critical piece in the social digital inclusion agenda we are driving on the continent,” said CFI Group CEO Darlington Mandivenga, noting that the partnership seeks to offer a low-cost solution for connectivity and to expand these services throughout the continent. “This partnership is providing consumers with affordable WiFi access, while local franchisees and partners are able to grow their businesses and the economies of their countries,” said LTG group COO Ahmad Mokhles. The partnership between CFI and LTG will see the roll-out of the Sasai WiFi Finder in Zimbabwe, Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and South Africa in phases over the coming months.