Local sectoral professional organisation Women in Nuclear South Africa (Winsa) announced on Friday the election of its new president. She is radiation protection professional Tebogo Motlhabane, a scientist with the National Radioactive Waste Disposal Institute (NRWDI). She replaces Nomathemba Radebe, a senior adviser in quality assurance at Eskom, who held the presidency since 2015. Winsa is part of the global Women in Nuclear (Win) network. The election was conducted online, with voting starting during the virtual special annual general meeting on July 30. The online polls were closed on August 6 (Thursday). The post of president was also contested by Mologadi Kekane who is one of the South African Nuclear Energy Corporation’s radiation protection managers. Kekane now becomes Winsa’s deputy president. “When I graduated with a Master’s degree in Applied Radiation Science and Technology, I felt one thing – pride. I was proud to have accomplished a qualification in a unique area but also delighted to know that I was adding to the small number of female scientists,” said Motlhabane after her election. “Women are still far from being adequately represented in the nuclear field. I see this as an opportunity for me to encourage young women to consider a career in nuclear science and technology.” She has worked in the nuclear sector for more than 16 years. She has gained experience with a number of organisations, including the National Nuclear Regulator, AngloGold Ashanti, Malepa Holdings, the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy and the International Atomic Energy Agency. Motlhabane has previously served on the executive committee of the Southern African Radiation Protection Association and established a Winsa chapter at the NRWDI. “Women in Nuclear Global acknowledge the election of a new Winsa president,” said Win Global president Dr Gabi Voigt. “I thank heartily the outgoing president, Nomathemba Radebe, for all her efforts and welcome Tebogo Motlhabane to the Win Global board. I wish her good success in her activities for the Win members in [the] South Africa region.” “I welcome the new Winsa president and wish her the best,” affirmed outgoing president Radebe. The announcement of the new president came at the beginning of ‘Women’s Month’ in South Africa.