The Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) has disputed allegations published by newspaper, the City Press, on August 16, claiming that Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu and the department’s director-general Mbulelo Tshangana are at odds over the appointment of Dr Les Konar and Piet Pieterse to do inspection work at water boards Lepelle Northern Water and Amatola Water, respectively. The DWS acknowledges that Sisulu had appointed Outsourced Risk and Compliance Assessment (ORCA), owned by Konar, to conduct an investigation into Lepelle Northern Water, in Limpopo. "ORCA was appointed by Lepelle Northern Water as per its own supply chain management mechanisms. The appointment of Konar was as stipulated in Section 45 of Water Services Act," the department notes. It further points out that Sisulu and Tshangana are well aware that the appointment of companies is regulated by the Public Finance Management Act and says such appointments are made through a bidding process. "The newspaper article further alleges that Konar has done the work for the department at the Amatola water board, in the Eastern Cape. This is also incorrect," says the department, stating that Konar was contracted to only work at Lepelle Northern Water. “The DWS noted with regret these allegations which are misleading. The department, as led by Tshangana, is disturbed by this unfortunate turn of events which have led to a blight on the Minister’s name that is causing an embarrassment for the Minister. "It should also be noted that, since taking office, Minister Sisulu is determined to root out corruption in the DWS and she is still on this mission, working closely and in collaboration with Tshangana as the accounting officer. "Even as the DWS continues uprooting the previous activities that have tarnished the image of this very important government department, one which is at the coalface of basic service delivery to the South African populace, such work will continue unabated and the efforts will not be side-tracked or deflected,” the department states.