Construction company GVK-Siya Zama has added a dedicated civils unit to its operational offering. Through this unit, the company aims to create jobs and better society by filling the void left by many companies in the construction industry that had to close their doors. This is according to GVK-Siya Zama chairperson Dumisani Madi, who says a time of crisis and uncertainty often presents entrepreneurs with good opportunities to grow their businesses. “Adding the civils component to our services will expand our reach in the market and increase our chance of procuring construction work through exposure to different clients.” Based in Gauteng, the unit will be structured to enable it to work countrywide from any of GVK-Siya Zama’s regional branches. It will be spearheaded by 35-year industry veteran Anton Botha, who has extensive civils experience at senior board level at some of the most prominent construction companies in the country. Notable civils projects that Botha has completed include water and wastewater treatment plants, reservoirs, windshields for power station chimneys, container terminals, wind farms, underground mining infrastructure, mine materials-handling services, process plants, the Gautrain station at Sandton, winder and shaft structures for new mine tunnel construction, production plants and silos. “There is huge demand for civil work at local or provincial levels, and in industry and mining, which is currently experiencing massive growth,” says Botha. The provision of roads, water and sewer infrastructure are key to creating a better environment for South Africans, he adds. “Infrastructure is vital for the growth of South Africa and this is acknowledged in government’s planned R340-billion infrastructure development plan.” Civils contractors will always be in demand in developing countries such as South Africa, where governments are obliged to create infrastructure for growing communities, says Botha. “Along with this, the downturn of the past few years means there are many skilled staff across most disciplines now available.” GVK-Siya Zama is a level 1 empowerment company. “As such, GVK-Siya Zama could bid on almost any kind of project with the reasonable confidence that the requisite skills are there,” says Botha. This is an exciting venture for the group, adds Madi. “We believe that tough and trying times create excellent opportunities for those who are keen to find them and seize them. While expansion and investment may feel counter-intuitive during a global pandemic, we believe that it’s the best time to seize the moment.”