Heavy equipment simulator training solutions Simformotion has announced the release of the new Cat Simulators System, called SimLite Excavator. The new compact and portable system allows instructors and learners to use the training inside of the classroom at physically distanced stations or to travel off-site with users, it said. Set in a city construction environment, the system teaches heavy equipment operation skills for the excavator—a machine found on construction sites worldwide. Correct operation leads to increased safety, production and cost savings. Simulation teaches learners with a hands-on and consistent experience. Learners can train in remote locations anytime and anywhere. “We’ve heard from schools, training centres and businesses − they have to keep training, despite the pandemic. So that meant engineering a design compact enough that it could travel easily in pelican cases; or be set up in classrooms at a safe distance.” “All of the things people love about Cat Simulators is packed into SimLite, including original equipment manufacturer controls and our exclusive reporting programme, SimU Campus,” says Simformotion CEO Lara Aaron. SimLite is built on a standardised platform and designed as a self-contained educational tool deployed through hardware and software that does not require Internet connectivity. SimLite includes exercises that teach how to perform a walkaround inspection, the principles of loading, raking, manoeuvring the machine around a worksite in tight spaces, and trenching. Moreover, an open training mode in each exercise offers opportunities for additional practice, skill refinement, and recreating site-specific scenarios for training. The system is available in multiple languages. To accompany SimLite, a complete curriculum is available online. It can be used in the classroom or for remote learning. It is a turnkey solution complete with instructor guides, lessons, videos, quizzes, tests and more. Further to the new SimLite Excavator, Cat Simulators are available in 17 other models for the construction, mining and forestry industries. Cat Simulators are the only Caterpillar-licensed simulator brand on the market.