A new scientific, engineering and technology (SET) association has been launched in the country. This is the Scientific Imaging Association of South Africa (Siasa). The association describes scientific imaging as “the process of obtaining images within a scientific discipline for the purpose of data gathering by making use of e.g. photonic, acoustic, electron or computational  energy during the utilisation of scientific instruments and techniques”. Siasa embraces systems that are space-based, ground-based, laboratory, or real-world and which are used for pure or applied research. It covers high-speed imagery, motion analysis imagery, digital volume correlation (three-dimensional, or 3D, strain and deformation measurements), digital image correlation (tracking the movement of a surface during an experiment or test), thermal and infrared imaging, polarimetric imaging (which captures only pre-selected orientations of polarised electromagnetic waves), multi- and hyperspectral imaging, untraviolet imaging, synthetic aperture radar imaging, radiography and X-ray imaging (of people, objects, materials and minerals), astronomical imaging, geospatial information system imaging, magnetic resonance imaging, flow visualisation imaging, differential interference contrast imaging, 3D scanning, sonar, ultrasound, seismic imaging, computed tomography, machine vision, and electron microscopy. The new association has been established because of the rapid advances in imaging technologies. “As a result, the technology and equipment used in scientific imaging have become increasingly technical and complicated, while at the same time being more accessible to scientists, engineers and general users,” stated Siasa. “A consequence of these two factors is the rising difficulty in keeping abreast of developments in one’s own area of expertise and in maintaining a functional understanding and awareness of related technology areas.” Siasa’s main purpose is to promote the development of a scientific imaging community in South Africa. To this end, it aims to act as a multidisciplinary networking institution, allowing SET imaging specialists to exchange knowledge and share resources. It also seeks to promote professional development in the sector by encouraging partnerships, and in particular to stimulate the professional development of younger scientists and engineers. “Siasa will provide a specialised niche function, focused on the tools used in the investigative studies, complimentary to the capabilities provided by other local organisations in the field,” it elucidated. “Where other organisations typically focus on outcomes and results in the field of study, Siasa’s focus is more on the ‘Materials and Methods’ aspects by emphasising skills development in optimal experimental design, techniques, setup, execution and equipment usage.” The association will help capacitate scientists and engineers to collect the best and most reliable data that they need to understand the phenomena that they are investigating. Membership is open to institutions and work groups as well as individuals. There are no registration or annual membership fees.