Mask manufacturer INEX reports that its locally manufactured reusable Sola MR2 KN95-equavalent face mask, which was launched in March, is gaining market traction. The respirator is not only tested, but proven in the market, with thousands of masks in use every day, according to INEX. It uses inexpensive disposable filters, made from high-tech nanofiber material, which INEX says outperform the filtration textiles found in Filtering Face Piece 2 or KN95 masks. This, says INEX, offers 99.99% anti-viral efficacy. INEX points out that, according to the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition, current regulations as to the type of respirator or mask recommended during the Covid-19 pandemic, is that the basic performance requirements are to achieve a filtration efficiency of 75% for particles of 5 μ and larger. In addition, INEX says the Sola MR2 offers enhanced protection on both inhale and exhale and, as a result of using thermoplastic elastomers to form a seal with the wearer's face, the mask provides an airtight fit, preventing air leakage in and out. INEX also states that its use of a sophisticated filtration system provides the Sola MR2 with an elaborate flow path that prevents moisture droplets from passing through the filter casing. Respirators and masks are particularly vulnerable to high humidity conditions as human breath is humid. And the sealed fit of a respirator or mask creates an environment that increases in humidity with every breath. As such, INEX’s Sola MR2 uses filters that are made from electrospun polyvinylidene-fluoride, which repels water and oil, thereby maintaining increased filtration efficiency if contact with these materials occurs. According to the World Health Organisation, masks that become damp, because of moisture from the nose and mouth, need to be replaced immediately, highlights INEX. In addition, the design of the INEX Sola MR2 ensures that the disposable filter does not come into contact with the user’s skin, preventing any sweat from touching the filter, maintaining filtration efficiency. Meanwhile, INEX also points out that the disposal of single-use masks poses a major environmental concern. “Needing only one reusable INEX mask, users are reducing their carbon footprint, decreasing environmental impacts,” the company states. Keeping to its theme of sustainability, the INEX reusable face mask and packaging is made from recyclable materials and all components are designed, sourced and manufactured in South Africa.