Co-working and flexi office solutions provider SiSebenza has launched South Africa’s first online marketplace for co-working, flexi, shared and virtual office spaces. As local businesses emerge from lockdown and re-think their office space requirements, SiSebenza will help companies with space needs analysis, sourcing, cost negotiations and contractual support. “Because we know what is out there, we help our clients decide what sort of premises best suit their needs. We source the ideal property for them and we negotiate with the landlord on their behalf. “Our experience enables us to get the best outcome for every client,” says SiSebenza cofounder and executive director Andrew Robinson. The company’s focus is on space as a service rather than a liability. Robinson says the space as a service business model is similar to a subscription service. “You take the space for as long or as short as you need it and pick the added-value services you want, such as a receptionist and access to meeting rooms. You pay only for what you use.” According to an Office Vacancy Report released by the South African Property Owners Association in April, national vacancy rates for Grade A and B offices were at 11.1% for the first quarter of the year. This is the worst it has been since early 2004 and the association expects vacancy rates to increase sharply over the rest of this year and into 2021 as more companies close. Robinson explains that landlords who accept that they need to do away with historical rental models will be much more successful at letting their property and much more able to keep their premises occupied. SiSebenza offers additional support to landlords and large corporates locked into long leases and that are looking to sublet that space. Although different sized companies have different space requirements, most have other needs in common. Robinson states that all are wary of long leases, all need to focus their attention now on business recovery and none want to waste precious time looking at premises. SiSebenza is seeing distinct property trends. The main consideration for big companies now is to mitigate health and safety risks for their workforces, which means staggered working days for a distributed workforce, different office spaces for different teams, more space for each person, or a hybrid solution of these and other options. Robinson points out that medium-sized companies are focused on cost-cutting now if they are to survive, while small businesses need to be where they can network so they can thrive and grow. “Our team of office space service stars take the hassle out of office renting – they are available to assist with space search, tours and negotiations. We do the legwork too to make our clients’ dream office a reality. “There is an ideal space for every requirement, and with more than 200 properties nationally on its books, SiSebenza can quickly and easily help clients find theirs.”