Construction of bulk infrastructure at the Tambo Springs Logistics Gateway has started. This development, located on the southern border of the Johannesburg and Ekurhuleni metros, is connected by road and rail corridors between Johannesburg and Ekurhuleni, in Gauteng; Durban, in KwaZulu-Natal; and Port Elizabeth and Ngqura, in the Eastern Cape. It encompasses industrial developments, logistics areas, rail access, secure and bonded locations and transportation corridors. An intermodal rail terminal is being developed as a concession, awarded by freight rail operator Transnet. The project is a public-private partnership (PPP), with the Tambo Springs Development Company as landowner and master developer. “We are very excited about the developments on site,” says Tambo Springs Development Company CEO Tumi Mohulatsi. “Construction of bulk infrastructure by the Ekurhuleni Metro is well underway. “It is the first step in delivering our vision of a next generation logistics gateway that will combine direct terminal handling facilities, as well as back-of-terminal property development and related value-add logistics services and activities.” The Tambo Springs Logistics Gateway promises to be the largest development of its kind in sub-Saharan Africa, doubling current freight logistics capacity in and out of Gauteng. The development will offer customs clearance and the benefits of a special economic zone. The development of the Tambo Springs Intermodal Rail Terminal should ensure that current and future container volume traffic is serviced on rail, alleviating the existing and projected pressure on the national road infrastructure. Furthermore, the facility is part of the government’s Strategic Infrastructure Project 2, aimed at developing growth-supporting infrastructure along the Durban­–Free State–Gauteng corridor. It also forms part of the Gauteng Integrated Transport Master plan. The Gauteng Department of Roads and Transport is set to construct a new interchange on the N3 and an additional arterial from Tambo Springs to the national road infrastructure. Budget for this has reportedly been approved and tenders for construction are currently being adjudicated. According to Mohulatsi, once completed, the gateway will offer easy access to major road and rail networks linking strategic sea ports, the OR Tambo International Airport and industries in the province. “Tambo Springs goes beyond the creation of a traditional industrial park. It will provide an efficient environment that facilitates manufacturing, distribution, transportation and logistics activities,” he notes. “More so, the project has the potential to create much-needed employment in a post-Covid-19 environment acting as a catalyst for growth, not just in the province, but Southern Africa. “The initiative has the potential to provide a living to approximately 140 000 people in the Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and Eastern Cape provinces.”