The Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries (DEFF) has invited public comment on the intention to amend the Environment Conservation Act Plastic Carrier Bags and Plastic Flat Bags Regulations. “Plastic waste has not only become a challenge in diverting it from going to landfill sites, but has grown to be one of the most problematic waste streams that continues to harm the environment. "Plastic waste is mostly common in illegal dumps, landfill sites and rivers and, ultimately, ends up in oceans causing harm to marine life,” says Environment, Forestry and Fisheries Minister Barbara Creecy. The intention to amend the regulations was published in Government Gazette 43601 on August 7. The amendment emanates from the review of all policies affecting plastic bags in the country. This includes input from stakeholders directly and indirectly affected by policies relating to plastic bags and their management at post-consumer stage. The review included determining the improvements required for a possible amendment to the memorandum of understanding between government, business and labour. It assessed whether the intended objectives of addressing the plastic bag litter problem and the promotion of the reuse and recycling of plastic carrier bags have been achieved and if any improvements are needed. To raise awareness about the plastic problem and strengthen the compact between government, business and labour, Creecy in November 2019 hosted the Plastic Colloquium. As a result, the DEFF is developing a Plastics Master Plan with targets, timeframes, actions and specific goals to ensure that actions discussed at the colloquium are implemented and that everyone responsible for the work is held accountable. Among the most important amendments to the regulations is the prohibition of the manufacture, trade and distribution of domestically produced and imported plastic carrier bags and plastic flat bags that do not meet outlined specifications for use within South Africa. The proposed amendments focus on post-consumer recyclate material generated by households or by commercial, industrial and institutional facilities in their role as end-users of the product. The amendments also state that the plastic carrier bags and plastic flat bags must be made from a minimum of 50% post-consumer recyclate from January 1, 2023, 75% of recycled materials from 2025 and must comprise 100% post-consumer recyclate from 2027. In terms of the amendment, any person who contravenes the regulations could face a fine of up to R5-million or five years imprisonment. In the case of a second or subsequent conviction, the person could be imprisoned for up to ten years or face a R10-million fine. Members of the public have been invited to submit their comments by September 7.