Minister of Higher Education, Science and Innovation Blade Nzimande officially opened applications for the 2021 National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) cycle, on Monday. This year, the NSFAS application cycle will run for four months starting from August 3 to November 30, and applications for 2021 funding will be done online via the myNSFAS portal as per previous years. Nzimande urged qualifying students to apply for funding on time. He said NSFAS has reinforced its partnership with the Department of Basic Education (DBE) to increase the NSFAS reach to learners in Grades 10 to 12. The DBE will link NSFAS with provincial and district offices and provide a database of National Teachers Centres which will assist with applications. NSFAS may also publish and incorporate its information on the National Senior Certificate (NSC) timetable. The training of District Curriculum Life Orientation Specialists on NSFAS funding is envisaged for subsequent application cycles. “While great work for the 2021 application cycle is underway, I want to reassure our current beneficiaries that the department, along with NSFAS, is working tirelessly ensuring that the 2020 academic year is saved and concluded to usher in the new academic year,” said Nzimande. NSFAS accounts for 40% of the undergraduate population at universities and 70% at technical vocational education and training (TVET) colleges. In the current academic year NSFAS has funded over 700 000 students – 248 242 at TVET colleges and 481 339 at universities (students with registration data). This is a 20% increase from the previous year when registration data was compared. The minister said the NSFAS portal has undergone minor changes in user experience and security features. NSFAS is also finalising its Virtual Outreach project – a platform hosting interactive live streaming sessions, virtual tours of NSFAS products and services, virtual exhibition simulations, real-time engagements and application demonstrations on how to apply for funding. “This is the greatest innovation by far, as it speaks to the current discussion around the Fourth Industrial Revolution and how government can change lives by providing much needed services in far and wide locations using technology. NSFAS is leading in this space,” Nzimande said. In March, NSFAS launched a virtual contact centre after closing its contact centre number. The virtual centre provides support to students for queries via social media platforms (Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and also hosts NSFAS Chat – a live interactive platform which is accessible via the myNSFAS portal. “I would like to thank the NSFAS Administrator Dr Randall Carolissen and his NSFAS team for his excellent leadership skills and turning around the scheme in just under two years. Dr Carolissen has been an integral part in the realisation of a much improved NSFAS, refining of critical skills, and forwarding thinking,” said Nzimande.