Tourism Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane says the sector’s road to recovery has begun and that the department is in the process of consolidating inputs received towards the Tourism Recovery Strategy, which will be submitted to Cabinet in the coming weeks. The start of Level 2 lockdown, effective August 18, saw the lifting of all restrictions on interprovincial travel, which means a fuller return to business for accommodation, hospitality venues and places of attraction. Kubayi-Ngubane stated during an address on August 19 that the Covid-19 pandemic had put a lot of strain on the tourism industry, with many companies not able to keep their full staff complements, or in some cases their doors open, after the last four months of trade and travel restrictions. She said her department intends to start, as soon as possible, with the implementation of a recovery strategy, working with the stakeholders within the tourism sector. “Heightened cooperation and partnerships among all sector players are essential as we implement our response plan and lay a foundation for a healthier, more resilient and competitive future,” the Minister said. She noted travellers were seeking a destination that offered diversity. South Africa, in this regard, is a destination that offers variety and diversity in terms of products and activities, with world class experiences that cater to every age group and traveller type. Although South Africa's international borders have not been opened up for leisure travel, yet, the Minister said, “we will continue to do analysis and rebuild our marketing proposition of Destination South Africa, moving one step at a time”. She added that the Level 2 lockdown announcement marked a significant leap and milestone for the tourism sector, reigniting business activities, saving jobs and many livelihoods that faced difficulties during the pandemic. The department had issued guidelines for safety protocols that the sector had to adhere to. “As we open up the sector, we are confident that measures are in place to protect suppliers, tourists and all those who are involved with the sector. "As government, we remain committed to working in a coordinated manner that meets National Development Plan goals, while ensuring that no tourism facility becomes a source of spread of the virus,” Kubayi-Ngubane said. GUIDELINES FOR BUSINESS Under Level 2, accommodation companies and facilities still had to keep record of all their visitors and ensure physical distancing and mask protocols were adhered to. With interprovincial travel being allowed under Level 2, accommodation facilities may accommodate these travellers, but within common areas there must be physical distancing and a maximum 50% occupancy of floor space. Restaurants may now open on-site consumption of alcohol; however, the Minister said restaurants and bars within hotels had to adhere to the 22:00 curfew. The Minister also appealed to the public to keep to the curfew and plan their travels accordingly. Kubayi-Ngubane said she was encouraged by having seen innovation in the restaurant industry, such as where you are able to scan a barcode for a menu to be displayed on your phone, minimising the risk of virus spread through menus switching hands. Meanwhile, attractions such as theme parks, amusement parks, water parks, family entertainment centres, zoos, national parks and other cultural activities, would be allowed to reopen, but they must ensure adherence to physical distancing through floor or seat markings. “We encourage online booking where possible and we also request tourist facilities to ensure that tourists and tour guides wear their masks and sanitise regularly. “These facilities must also provide sanitation where people use touch screens or buttons. For all activities that involve water and quad bikes or other equipment, the management must ensure that equipment and facilities are being regularly sanitised,” Kubayi-Ngubane stated. Within tour buses or other vehicles, the seats must be marked to ensure physical distancing. Tour guides must keep record of their customers and make it available to the authorities whenever required. In terms of wedding and other function venues, the maximum number of attendees must comply with national guidelines, being 50 people. These facilities must place an emphasis on physical distancing, sanitising and wearing of masks. The Minister said no buffets would be allowed. In terms of relief for the sector, she urged businesses to apply to the National Treasury’s Loan Guarantee Scheme, which it was implementing with various banks. The Department of Tourism had paid 3 116 tour guides a monthly sum for relief, while a further 3 000 tourist guides were being verified by the department, to make sure that people are not “double dipping” with relief from the Unemployment Insurance Fund as well. “Covid-19 surely impacted on our operations, but certainly not our sense of hospitality; the sector stands ready to host you.” In a separate statement, The Tourism Business Council of South Africa has assured that the tourism and hospitality industry is aware of the responsible protocols expected from it and businesses applying these protocols can obtain a Travel Safe East Safe certificate, which is endorsed by the World Travel and Tourism Council. The certificate can be displayed in establishments and on their websites, providing the much-needed assurance to consumers of the business’ use of required health and hygiene protocols.