Air pollution, dust control and pneumatic product handling specialist Air Envirotech has started operating, providing a comprehensive range of air environmental and pneumatic conveying services, systems and technologies. The company mainly focuses on the mining, metallurgical processing and general industrial sectors. Air Envirotech was established by industry specialists, who, to date, comprised the Takraf South Africa air environmental and pneumatics team. Following an agreement with Takraf South Africa, they will now provide their services as an independent entity. Air Envirotech inherits expertise in air environmental control and pneumatic conveying that has been built up over nearly 50 years servicing Southern African industry, first as part of the Bateman Group and later as part of Takraf South Africa. The extensive air environmental reference list includes the design and supply of more than 3 000 dust control systems for a variety of applications, with the client list featuring major mining companies in South Africa and further afield, including Botswana and Namibia. In addition, leading industrial companies such as paper manufacturers, cement companies and the national power utility have been returning clients. Air Envirotech’s services range from system design, through to manufacture, turnkey installations and after-sales service, with expertise provided over a full range of dust and air pollution control technologies. These include electrostatic precipitators, baghouses and bagfilters, cyclones, dry / wet scrubbers, dust suppression systems and dry and semi-dry flue-gas desulphurisation systems. The company also has a range of pneumatic conveying systems available. This includes systems for lean, medium and dense phase conveying regimes, suitable for applications across the industrial sector. “With the increasing legislative stringency and public pressure to reduce the environmental and health and safety impact of industrial operations, we believe [the company] is well positioned to support industry ‘work for cleaner air’," says Air Envirotech’s Jimmy Tomlin.