Digital road freight platform Saloodo!, a subsidiary of DHL Global Forwarding, has signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU) to be the first logistics provider to offer digital road freight solutions on AfricaPLC. AfricaPLC is an industrial e-commerce marketplace and fintech platform, managed by the Africa Investor (Ai). Ai is an institutional investment holding platform that vets and promotes infrastructure, private equity and technology investment opportunities in Africa. The new partnership will address some of the biggest obstacles facing businesses seeking to expand across Africa and other global markets, such as access to trade opportunities, the sourcing of credible partners, trade finance and reliable logistics solutions, says Saloodo! Saloodo! also believes that it will inject greater transparency and efficiency into the trade system by enabling shippers – from small enterprises and startups to large multinational groups – to find trusted and reliable freight carriers across Africa. “Our partnership with AfricaPLC is an exciting opportunity for Saloodo! to showcase our intuitive digital platform that will offer shippers and transport providers a single, simple, reliable interface to optimise costs, routes, cargo and transit times,” says Saloodo! Middle East and Africa CEO Tobias Maier. “Road freight continues to form the backbone of Africa’s logistics industry and I’m convinced that our digital solution will further its progress as the economy recovers.” According to the World Bank, intra-African trade is one of the best options Africa has to eradicate challenges such as poverty and hunger. Intra-African trade not only provides solutions and opportunities for businesses to grow, but also expands the African economy. “AfricaPLC is committed to supporting the growth of any organisation, particularly small and medium enterprises (SMEs), through the African Continental Free Trade Area and globalising African e-trade ecosystems,” says AfricaPLC chairperson Hubert Danso. “By partnering with Saloodo!, our SME, corporate, public sector and trade finance customers can be assured that fulfilment is carried out by a reliable and compliant provider, which can provide full visibility and transparency throughout the shipping process. “This allows our partners to channel resources on further growing their business intra-Africa and in global markets, and to efficiently manage their budgets and supply chain networks.” During the current Covid-19 pandemic, AfricaPLC has been supporting its public and private sector partners to facilitate the trade and transport of personal protective equipment across the African continent. “Since we entered into South Africa last year, Saloodo! has successfully expanded to the rest of the continent and is perfectly positioned to further push the envelope of digitalisation to improve the state of logistics services in Africa,” says Maier.