Property developer Balwin reports that its newly created entity, Mooikloof Mega Residential City: Gauteng (Mooikloof Mega City), has been designated by the Presidential Infrastructure Coordinating Commission Council as a strategic integrated project (SIP) in terms of Government Gazette No. 43547 published on July 24. Balwin states that the SIP designation means that the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure will pay for all external bulk services installations such as water, sewer, electricity, roads and stormwater for the Mooikloof Mega City. The Mooikloof Mega City entity is intended for the purposes of entering into a corporate joint venture with Seafront Lux owned majority by Johan Franck and Paul Hailwood. Along with the SIP designation, Balwin has been in negotiations with Franck and Hailwood regarding the possibility of a joint venture to undertake the Mooikloof Mega City project, as the two individuals have extensive sectional title development experience. Both have also been in negotiations with the departments of Human Settlements and Public Works and Infrastructure, as well as other governmental departments, to have the development recognised as an SIP for the past ten years. Balwin will be a 70% shareholder and Seafront Lux will be a 30% shareholder of Mooikloof Mega City and their relationship will be governed in terms of a shareholders’ agreement To take advantage of the fact that all bulk services and bulk contributions will be covered by government, Mooikloof Mega City has concluded two sale agreements for the purposes of starting the Mooikloof Mega City development. Mooikloof Mega City has concluded a sales agreement with Central Plaza Investments 28 (CPI) in terms of which the remaining extent of portion 62 (a portion of portion 1) of the Farm Rietfontein 375, JR, measuring 133.94 ha in extent (CPI property) will be acquired for R207.36-million. Mooikloof Mega City has also concluded a sales agreement with Forum SA Trading 284 (Forum SA) in terms of which Portion 1046 of the Farm Rietfontein 375 JR, measuring 76.9 ha in extent (Forum Property), will be acquired for R125.13-million. The landholding of the Forum Property and the CPI Property measures about 210 ha in extent and includes a residential component, two educational facilities and a commercial node. It is envisaged that the Forum Property and the CPI Property would be consolidated to form one property. A filling station is also considered for the development. Balwin will only develop the residential component and the educational, commercial and filling station erven will be sold to a third party, with the combined area being about 20 ha. Both the Forum Property and CPI Property are located in Mooikloof in Pretoria East. The surrounding townships include Woodhill Golf Estate, Mooikloof Equestrian Estate, Mooikloof Heights, Mooikloof Ridge, The Hills Golf Estate, Grootfontein Country Estate and Mooikloof Glen. Both Properties are situated on Garsfontein drive in Pretoria, Gauteng, about 6 km from the Junction with De Ville Bois Mareuil drive where Woodlands Boulevard Mall is located and 8 km from Solomon Mahlangu drive which gives access to the N4 and other main arterial routes. The purpose of Mooikloof Mega City is to undertake the Mooikloof Mega City development on the properties and to construct and deliver about 16 000 residential apartments, with the potential to increase to 50 000 residential apartments.