Japan has supported socioeconomic development and support programmes at the grassroots level in South Africa for more than a quarter century, Japanese Ambassador Norio Maruyama pointed out on Tuesday. He was giving the introductory address at a project contract signing ceremony at the Embassy in Pretoria.

These projects fall under the ambit of Japan's Grant Assistance for Grassroots Human Security Projects (GGP) programme. The South African element of this programme also covers eSwatini and Lesotho. In all, 17 projects spread across the three countries are receiving funding this year.

"This year we have special attention to two things -- the empowerment of women, particularly women's health: Japan is committed to the empowerment of women," he highlighted. "The second field we wish to emphasise this year ... [are] institutions that assist people with disabilities." (This latter emphasis is linked to the 2020 Paralympics, which will be held later this year in Japan.)

Since the GGP programme was launched in South Africa, R500-million has been awarded to 650 projects. (These figures exclude eSwatini and Lesotho.)

Women's health projects being funded this year include a mobile clinic, with a Fujifilm ultrasound unit (donated by the manufacturer), for women who work on farms. This clinic will be donated to the Hoedspruit Training Trust/Hlokomela Project, which operates in Limpopo and Mpumalanga.

Another beneficiary is the Eluthandweni Maternity Clinic in Vosloorus, south east of Johannesburg. This will receive an ambulance and medical equipment worth R1-million, to help the clinic provide affordable and quality health care, and reduce infant and maternal mortality.

A third organisation being aided is the Trauma Centre for Survivors of Violence and Torture, in the Western Cape province. This will be provided with a mobile mental healthcare clinic and two vehicles. These will provide dignity and privacy to survivors of violence and torture.

Regarding people with disabilities, the construction of a skills centre for profoundly intellectually disabled children will be funded. This will be at the Makhaloaneng Primary School at Maluti-A-Phofung in the Free State.

Furthermore, the GGP programme will pay for renovations at the Londanani Care Centre in Makhado in Limpopo province. A vehicle equipped with wheelchair hydraulics will also be donated.