From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Local hydraulic pump supplier Werner South Africa Pumps & Equipment has upgraded its on-site facilities to allow for better quality control, more environment friendly manufacturing and faster assembly of its hydraulic pump trucks. Halima Frost has the details. Halima Frost: Werner South Africa has undertaken to expand its on-site facilities to cope with the demand for its truck mounted high pressure pump and jetting units. The upgrades have allowed the company to increase its turnaround time from about four to six months to as little as two to three months, depending on the truck or trailer mounted unit ordered Werner Pumps MD Sebastian Werner explains what upgrades have been made to the facility. Werner South Africa Pumps & Equipment MD Sebastian Werner: Halima Frost: The upgrades also include two under roof welding booths – one of which houses a new tank welding rotator which allows the tank to be easily and smoothly rotated while the welder works.  Werner suggests that the quality and uniformity of the weld has been more evident since this addition. Werner tells Engineering News that the need to upgrade came with being ISO accredited which prompted the company to improve its standards and efficacy, with an even further push to improve the company’s environmental ratings. Werner also suggests that the company not only looked at its own environmental impact, but also that of the products it supplies to its clients. Werner South Africa Pumps & Equipment MD Sebastian Werner: Halima Frost: Werner also highlights that being 100% locally assembled, allows for job creation and helps boost local manufacture, and also helps the company offer better prices and most importantly, quality. Werner South Africa Pumps & Equipment MD Sebastian Werner: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.