As the nation waits for President Cyril Ramaphosa to address the country this evening, amid the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic, the President released his weekly column, highlighting the task governments across the globe had to contain the virus and to protect people and economies. Health Minister Zweli Mkhize on Sunday said the number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in the country stood at 274, an increase of 34 cases from Saturday’s reported 240 cases. Ramaphosa wrote in his weekly newsletter to fellow South Africans that the government had a duty to ensure that it contained the spread of the virus and provided help to those in need. “There comes a time in the affairs of a country when, in the face of the most formidable of challenges, its very existence as a nation is put to the test. The coronavirus pandemic continues to spread at a relentless pace across the globe. As nations of the world we find ourselves in the same fight: to contain the virus, to protect the lives of our people, and to fortify our economies against the inevitable disruption to manufacturing, productivity, growth and employment,” he said. It has been a week since Ramaphosa declared a National State of Disaster as an urgent response to the outbreak, with the putting in place of necessary containment measures. He announced the prohibition of gatherings of more than 100 people, restrictions on people entering the country, the closure of schools, prohibition on the sale of alcohol and emergency procurement procedures in support of the fight against Covid-19. The President said corporate South Africa and the business community have stepped up and affirmed their support for the emergency measures and regulations. He added that it also opened channels of engagement around the economic impact of Covid-19. On Sunday, Ramaphosa met with representatives of the business community to discuss additional measures to be implemented to combat the pandemic and address its economic impact. This week, he will meet with various arms of State, trade unions, traditional leaders and civil society, among others. “Elsewhere, large retailers have issued directives restricting the purchase quantities of in-demand items to curtail so-called ‘panic buying’. This measure was a laudable effort to protect the rights of ordinary South Africans, but most especially the poor. It is also a welcome sign that South African business will not engage in unscrupulous profiteering from a national disaster,” said Ramaphosa. The President said the manner in which all South Africans have taken charge of not just their own personal health but the health of those around them had been exemplary and heartening. Last week, representatives from all the political parties in Parliament stood united and offered their practical and workable suggestions on how, together, they can mitigate the impact Covid-19 had on the lives and livelihoods of citizens.
 
Religious leaders have also affirmed their support for the containment measures, and have taken their own measures to contain the spread of the virus in churches, temples, mosques and synagogues. “What we are witnessing is social solidarity in action, a defining feature of our nationhood. At times of crisis such as this one, it would be easy to surrender to the impulses of opportunism, greed and naked self-interest. History bears witness to the dark side of human nature that can be exposed when fear and panic take hold,” Ramaphosa said. He urged South Africans to observe the highest standards of hygiene practices and social distancing and called on citizens to help their fellow South Africans during this pandemic. He acknowledged the hygiene practices being adopted by petrol stations, taxi ranks, spaza shops and restaurants and also urged businesses to comply with labour regulations in the best interests of customers and employees. “This crisis will not debilitate our nation. In how we have responded, we have affirmed the true character of our nationhood. It is strong, it is resilient and, above all, it is rooted in solidarity. It is these attributes of our national character that won us our democracy and it is what will ensure our victory over this pandemic,” he concluded.