The Parliamentary Portfolio Committee on Health has commended the procedures that have been adopted by Airports Company South Africa (Acsa) at OR Tambo International Airport (east of Johannesburg) to respond to Covid-19, the novel coronavirus disease which has rapidly spread around the world, and which arrived in South Africa, from Italy, through air travel. The committee carried out an inspection visit to the airport on Friday. “As committee members we were impressed by the measures being put in place by Acsa,” said committee chairperson Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo. “We were also pleased to observe that strict protocols for screening incoming passengers by Port Health officials remains [sic] in place.” (Port Health is a unit of the Department of Health.) “We are most appreciative of the opportunity to engage directly with members of the portfolio committee,” stated Acsa CEO Mpumi Mpofu. “Their interest and concern was evident. Members sought clear responses to their direct and pertinent questions, and we endeavoured to respond in detail.” OR Tambo International Airport ranks second only to the Beit Bridge crossing on the South African/Zimbabwean border in terms of the numbers of international visitors entering the country. The committee members were briefed, during their visit, about the procedures being adopted at the airport and at Acsa’s other international and regional airports. They also toured the airport’s terminal buildings. Following the advice of the Department of Health, Acsa has reinforced the measures it is taking to guard against Covid-19. These measures follow the protocols and standards issued by the World Health Organisation, the International Civil Aviation Organisation and the South African Civil Aviation Authority. The company has urged airport workers to wear gloves and passengers and workers to wear face masks. High-contact surfaces at the airport are being more frequently cleaned with disinfectant. Hand sanitisers have been put at various places throughout Acsa’s airports. “In collaboration with all the authorities we urge travellers to follow the advice of global authorities and to avoid false or deceptive information,” she stressed.