Marriott International has opened the Johannesburg Marriott Hotel Melrose Arch and the Marriott Executive Apartments Johannesburg Melrose Arch, marking the debut of Marriott Executive Apartments in South Africa and the first purpose-built Marriott Hotel in the country. Owned and developed by property developers Amdec Group, the hotel and apartments are situated in the Melrose Arch precinct and provide a destination for business travellers and a fully serviced extended stay destination. “We are thrilled to open [these developments], further strengthening our relationship with Amdec Group in South Africa,” says Marriott International Middle East and Africa Premium & Select Brands VP Sandra Schulze–Potgieter. The developments form part of Marriott International’s commitment to expand its footprint in Africa and deepen its brand portfolio in South Africa. Marriott Hotels began a worldwide transformation six years ago featuring a new design including locally-inspired accents, open closets and a flexible work surface which allow guests to freely move and use technology however they desire. Johannesburg Marriott Hotel Melrose Arch is the first Marriott Hotel in South Africa to showcase the brand’s new design touchpoints. The property features 306 guest rooms, including ten junior suites. The hotel offers business facilities, such as the Greatroom – a contemporary space located in the hotel lobby designed for socialising, relaxing and working. Access to the M Club Lounge, reserved for Marriott Bonvoy Elite loyalty members and Club paying members, provides complimentary breakfast, evening drinks, hors d’oeuvres and premium beverages. Accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week, the M Club Lounge provides free WiFi, printing and power supplies. The hotel also features two dining venues, Archer Bar and Eatery. It offers seven meeting rooms, a ballroom and a prefunction space. Other facilities include a 24-hour fitness centre, outdoor heated swimming pool and pool bar. On the upper floors of the new build, Marriott Executive Apartments Johannesburg Melrose Arch features 84 fully sized and equipped one-, two- or three-bedroom apartment units. Marriott International operates 61 hotels in South Africa and has a further eight hotels in the pipeline.