From Creamer Media in Johannesburg, this is the Real Economy Report. Sashnee Moodley: Nonprofit organisation, the South African Emergency Ventilator Project, or SAVE-P, was launched in March in an effort to cost-effectively locally produce much-needed ventilators to meet an expected shortage. Natasha Odendaal tells us more. Natasha Odendaal: A successful home-grown ventilator project has delivered a prime example of South African talent and collaboration, as well as a new opportunity to locally produce much-needed medical equipment in Africa for Africa and the world. Rand York Castings joint CEO Justin Corbett speaks to Engineering News about this project. Rand York Castings joint CEO Justin Corbett: Natasha Odendaal: Within a few months, the SAVE-P team redesigned, built and tested the mechanical CPAP 100 Ventilator, which can be manufactured using existing local technology and locally sourced materials. Rand York Castings joint CEO Justin Corbett: Natasha Odendaal: The project generated overwhelming support from industry, with several large and small firms raising their hands to help after a call for assistance early in March. Rand York Castings joint CEO Justin Corbett: Natasha Odendaal: MCR Manufacturing’s newly-expanded warehouse was repurposed for the assembly of the ventilators. MCR Manufacturing MD Claudio Maccaferri: Natasha Odendaal: Tapping into the Bosch global network of knowledge and sourcing was also critical to getting the project off the ground. Multinational Bosch Group Region Africa president Dr Marcus Thill: Natasha Odendaal: These were the only two components imported, with the rest of the ventilator made up of local materials. Reef Engineering CEO Graham Ellett: Rand York Castings joint CEO Justin Corbett: Natasha Odendaal: Meanwhile, the project team is also in talks with organisations in several other African countries, which have indicated an interest in procuring ventilators to help them with their own Covid-19 treatment programmes. Rand York Castings joint CEO Justin Corbett: Multinational Bosch Group Region Africa president Dr Marcus Thill: Sashnee Moodley: That’s Creamer Media’s Real Economy Report. Join us again next week for more news and insight into South Africa’s real economy. Don’t forget to listen to the audio version of our Engineering News daily email newsletter.