With Covid-19 restrictions, Air Traffic and Navigation Services (ATNS) is piloting virtual training through its Aviation Training Academy. ATNS’ Aviation Training Academy offers aviation training to several countries in Africa since it was certified as a training institution in 1996. In 2018, ATNS and Namibia Civil Aviation Authority (NCAA) signed a training contract for the delivery of an air navigation service bursar training programme. As part of the agreement and owing to challenges posed by the pandemic, ATNS and NCAA agreed to continue with the remainder of the programme by means of this virtual training platform. Consequently, both entities established virtual training platforms through the installation of audio and video capable equipment to enable the smooth delivery of the training curriculum. Training is conducted through a stable online training platform, with all users being able to login through dedicated user accounts and have access to pertinent course packages applicable to the courses. This training is seamlessly achieved with students centralised in Windhoek, Namibia, and ATNS training instructors stationed at the Aviation Training Academy in Johannesburg. The first course presented on a virtual platform was the Air Traffic Safety Electronics Personnel basic training which started in early August and is scheduled to end in early October. The other, the Air Traffic Services course, commenced in September and is expected to be completed by mid-November. Twenty-five students are registered for both courses. Practical training, including simulator and related-equipment exercises, will take place at the ATNS Aviation Training Academy after successful completion of these training courses. ATNS acting CEO Dumisani Sangweni says that, based on the NCAA training trial, ATNS will introduce its virtual and online aviation training roadmap to its continental stakeholders and clients. “This will save costs and in the long term, contribute towards the realisation of the African Union’s Agenda 2063 aims and objectives and that of safer African skies through proper and adequate training, besides others.”