The pandemic has heightened concerns over health and air quality and LG Air Solutions' latest portfolio of air purification solutions for the Middle East and Africa (MEA) region aims to deal with the growing concerns about air quality inside buildings and facilities, as well as outdoors. This was indicated during the 2020 LG Electronics Air Solutions B2B Middle East and Africa Digital Press Conference, held on September 28. LG Air Solutions Business Middle East and Africa president James Lee said the pandemic has engendered changes in lifestyle, interest and values, and that the heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) industry is facing a transformational period to meet the environmental and social needs brought about by a growing population, urban development and climate changes. Therefore, he noted that LG was aiming to meet the needs of customers in the ‘new normal’ with its sustainable solutions. Lee acclaimed that the company has historically enjoyed success in the MEA and that it is providing its solution to many projects in the region, for example, a Pick n Pay store in South Africa. LG MEA Air Solutions Engineering Sales Team regional director Iyad Jurdy said the pandemic was a harsh reminder of the importance of good air quality. He noted that LG had solutions for providing this in homes, office buildings and shopping malls. For residential, he noted that the main distinct need was utilisation. LG has, therefore, developed a Multi VS system, which Jurdy noted is a compact but powerful system, with environment-friendly qualities. He said it saved floor space and allowed for easy installation. The system also boasts LG ThinQ technology, which has artificial intelligence capabilities that allows users to check air quality on their phones Jurdy said that in office spaces, the biggest need is optimisation, with the HVAC system needing to produce the best output, adjusting to changing climate conditions outside, and space use inside, while still providing a good environment for employees and energy efficient solutions for owners. Therefore, he noted that a powerful and smart solution was required. Here, he highlighted the company’s Multi V5 system, the company’s flagship system; which he enthused featured enhanced efficiency, durability and reliability. The system measures temperate and humidity to maximise operational efficiency and occupant comfort. Moreover, it has an automatic dust removal system; and an adequate ventilation system enabled by a three-stage purification process, to ensure healthy air quality in the office. For shopping malls, he noted that these have various spaces with different purposes; therefore, an effective system needs to cater to these different needs without compromising on performance or efficiency. This requires an HVAC solution that provides air handling units and a good control system to monitor and adjust the system. He reiterated that the company’s diverse portfolio of solutions could cater to all these needs. MEA Air Solution Engineering Sales Team leader Prabhjeet Singh Channa emphasised that air quality was a serious issue globally, with half a million people dying from air pollution in the MEA region yearly, according to the World Health Organisation. He highlighted that the company’s dual vane cassette, which he said controls air flow precisely owing to its eight vents, saves energy by shortening the time to reach the desired temperature. In terms of air purification, it can purify up to 150.9 m2 of space with a powerful five-step air purification system, he added. Channa noted that the air purification kit in the system had been certified by third parties, which attests to its reliability.