The International Air Transport Association (Iata) – the representative body of the global airline industry – has urged governments to start planning now for the distribution of Covid-19 vaccines, when they become available. This planning should include the air transport sector as well as other stakeholders. Air cargo has long played a crucial role in the distribution of vaccines by means of systems that are time- and temperature-sensitive, and well-established worldwide. These networks and systems will be essential for the rapid and efficient distribution of Covid-19 vaccines, when they are released for use. “Safely delivering Covid-19 vaccines will be the mission of the century for the global air cargo industry,” highlighted Iata director-general and CEO Alexandre de Juniac. “But it won’t happen without careful advance planning. And the time for that is now. We urge governments to take the lead in facilitating cooperation across the logistics chain so that the facilities, security arrangements and border processes are ready for the mammoth and complex task ahead.” “Delivering billions of doses of vaccine to the entire world efficiently will involve hugely complex logistical and programmatic obstacles all the way along the supply chain,” stressed vaccine alliance Gavi CEO Dr Seth Berkley. “We look forward to working together with government, vaccine manufacturers and logistical partners to ensure an efficient global roll-out of a safe and affordable Covid-19 vaccine.” The transport of vaccines must be done in compliance with strict international regulations, including the maintenance of controlled temperatures and the avoidance of delays. Because of their importance and value, vaccines must be protected from tampering and theft. And they must benefit from efficient health and border processes at airports and other border crossing points. The scale of an operation to distribute Covid-19 vaccines would be enormous. To supply just one dose each to 7.8-billion people would require the entire cargo holds of 8 000 Boeing 747 freighter aircraft. “Even if we assume that half the needed vaccines can be transported by land, the air cargo industry will still face its largest single transport challenge ever,” emphasised De Juniac. “In planning their vaccine programmes, particularly in the developing world, governments must take very careful consideration of the limited air cargo capacity that is available at the moment. If borders remain closed, travel curtailed, fleets grounded and employees furloughed, the capacity to deliver life-saving vaccines will be very much compromised.”