The yearly Windaba conference will take place virtually this year on October 26 and 27. The renewable energy sector and its stakeholders will also gather on the Windaba 2020 Virtual Marketplace platform to unpack the role of the industry in the energy transition for the decade ahead. South African Wind Energy Association (SAWEA) CEO Ntombifuthi Ntuli says this year’s Windaba is especially relevant to the sector, since government has made the drive toward renewable energy part of its economic recovery plans. The virtual Windaba conference will make use of artificial intelligence technology to match buyers and sellers, offer video conferencing capabilities and the ability to livestream content to the platform, as well as offering pre-recorded content. Ntuli says the digital platform will allow for a greater international reach as delegates can log in to the platform and access the conference with ease. SAWEA is expecting more than 400 delegates to attend the virtual Windaba and about 2 000 participants on the virtual marketplace. The Windaba 2020 Virtual Marketplace will feature a full online conference programme, virtual exhibition and an online business platform that will enable the renewable energy sector and its various stakeholders to engage in one-on-one meetings. The platform will also enable access to key content about the latest industry developments and track latest bids and opportunities in the marketplace. The dedicated Windaba 2020 Virtual Marketplace platform will be available for 12 months after the event, allowing exhibitors to place products in a virtual showroom that will be frequented by targeted buyers. Ntuli says the conference was preceded by a series of industry webinars focusing on topical issues, which had received an overwhelmingly positive response and engagement from sector participants. Local and international thought leaders will lead discussions on pertinent issues that will guide the sector’s ability to unpack the evolution of green power. The conference programme includes topics such as jobs and skills; land issues in wind energy development; wind and energy storage; local supply chain development; balancing environmental constraints with energy developmental imperatives; wake loss effects; and the Integrated Resource Plan 2019 and what it means for costs.