Radisson Hotel Group is on track to open its twelfth hotel in South Africa, with the opening of the Radisson Hotel & Convention Centre Johannesburg which will be launched at OR Tambo International Airport in October. The group first entered the South African market in 2000 and has since grown its portfolio in the country to 16 hotels in operation and under development, ranging from midscale to upscale properties across four brands. The brands comprise Park Inn by Radisson, Radisson, Radisson Blu and the lifestyle concept brand Radisson RED. Radisson Middle East & Africa senior area VP Tim Cordon says the group is happy to be able to continue opening hotels in such unprecedented times and within key markets such as South Africa. Among the group’s future plans are to introduce the Radisson RED brand to Johannesburg, based on the success of the Radisson RED hotel in Cape Town. “We are reinforcing our offerings across the country for both city and resort hotels, but also entering into safari, national parks and other unique nature-based locations. “We believe our current presence in South Africa, along with the regional support office located in the country, will further accelerate our ability to respond to local opportunities commercially and operationally but also support our development strategy,” says Radisson Africa & Turkey development VP Ramsay Rankoussi. Meanwhile, Radisson continues to address the ever-changing needs of the modern traveller, for example with recently launching Hybrid Meetings, which combines the best of meeting in person and virtually, offering a reliable image, sound and video conferencing system, dual screens, wireless presentation clicker and high-speed Internet connection. As the world continues to adapt to “new normals” and ongoing travel limitations, meeting and event organisers can now choose to offer virtual participation options and hybrid formats that allow for small local gatherings, while also broadcasting to remote attendees and satellite locations. Globally, Radisson has 1 400 hotels in operation and under development across 120 countries.