The new inner city mixed-use precinct development, Jewel City, will officially be launched to the public on Heritage Day. Jewel City is a residential, commercial and retail development undertaken by Divercity – a partnership between property developers and funds Atterbury, iThemba and Talis. The mixed-use development is an extension of the existing Maboneng precinct in the Johannesburg central business district, which is bordered by Commissioner and Main streets, Berea road and Joe Slovo drive and comprises six blocks. The spine of the precinct is Fox street, which is set to be pedestrianised as part of the ongoing development to link Maboneng to Jewel City through to Absa's offices. This urban renewal project of an inner city space began in October 2018. The project entailed revamping the area into a revitalised precinct, consisting of 1 550 apartments, 20 017 m2 of Grade A office space, sufficient parking, a Curo school, a clinic, a gym, rooftop soccer fields, banking facilities, fast food outlets and restaurants and a plethora of retail convenience offerings. The residential buildings include The Diamond and The Onyx. The former is a six-storey apartment building launched in November 2019, with rentals starting from R3 400. The latter is a 13-storey apartment building, launched in May, with rentals starting from R3 600. Both buildings boast cost-effective fibre Internet, DStv and OpenView connections, security, rooftop access, recreational space, children's play areas, basement parking and new interior finishes. The precinct’s retail space comprises 7 000 m2. Retailers include Shoprite, Chicken Licken, MTN and Postnet, besides others. During a media tour of the development on September 16, Divercity CEO Carel Kleynhans said that, by the launch date, almost all of the retailers would be open and ready for trading. Owing to the pandemic and lockdown restrictions, the launch of the precinct is limited and there will be no indoor events. However, Divercity will host an open air market, with buskers and performing arts through the precinct, as well as sellers from the broader community selling their products from September 24 to 27. Kleynhans noted that, owing to the interest Divercity has already received for this market, it is looking to continue this trading space offering. He indicated that the urban redevelopment project formed part of Divercity’s mandate to provide affordable housing to lower income citizens, while also creating a “live, work, play” area surrounding the buildings. This will allow tenants to have access to medical care, work, restaurants, shops, exercise facilities, walking areas and schools, without having to travel too far. Moreover, by creating a pedestrianised space at the centre of the development, this would allow access back to the precinct for citizens, Kleynhans noted, with this area having been closed off to the general public for years. While much of the precinct has already been pedestrianised, this will be further enhanced by pedestrianising Fox street. The precinct also includes vibrant street art by South African artists.