Following a massive oil leak earlier this month from a stranded vessel off the coast of Mauritius, Japan has dispatched a third Japan Disaster Relief Expert (DRE) team to undertake on-site environmental assistance activities, at the request of the Mauritian government. The team left Japan on September 2. The Wakashio bulk carrier, operated by Japanese firm Mitsui OSK Lines got stranded off the coast of Mauritius on July 25, while travelling from China to Brazil to load ores. At the early stage of the accident, no leakage was confirmed. Nagashiki Shipping, the owner of the vessel, conducted its salvage, which did not go smoothly owing to rough ocean and weather conditions. On August 6, cracks appeared on the vessel body and about 1 000 t of fuel oil − out of 4 000 t loaded – leaked into the ocean. According to Mitsui, about 3 000 t of oil inside the vessel was almost completely removed by August 12. The front part of the vessel, which split in two, was scuttled on August 24. After receiving a request from the Mauritian government, the Japanese government decided to dispatch an initial six-member DRE team to the affected area. So far, the team engaged in a leakage survey and oil removal and control activities. The team also offered training to the National Coast Guard of Mauritius on oil removal and control. This team returned to Japan on August 23. Additionally, the Japanese government dispatched a second DRE team with seven members on August 19 to support environmental protection, assisting in activities such as countering oil which was washed ashore and assessing its impact on the ecosystem of the affected area. The Japanese government also offered equipment for oil control and removal, at the request of the Mauritian government. The team leaving on September 2 will undertake on-site environmental assistance activities. A statement from the Embassy of Japan reports that the accident has caused serious damage to the environment in Mauritius, which could, in turn, have a serious impact on the country’s tourism industry – a major contributor to the country’s economy. The Japanese government stated its commitment to continue supporting the restoration of the natural environment and recovery of economic activities of Mauritius.