To assist in the revival and swift recovery of the tourism sector, the town of Stellenbosch is embarking on a range of initiatives to support local business, driving demand and inspiring locals to experience and share their town the same way a tourist would, destination marketing organisation Visit Stellenbosch says. It highlights measures taken by residents and businesses, such as the establishment of Stellenbosch Unite to feed vulnerable communities, and the roll-out of travel readiness campaign, Stellenbosch Ready. “As an extension of Visit Stellenbosch’s initiatives, Support Stellenbosch has been created to inspire locals to support local and stimulate our town’s economy and pave the way for its swift recovery. "To that end, we are extending this solidarity to support our restaurants and tourism businesses that continue to be affected by the lockdown and resulting lack of patronage,” explains Visit Stellenbosch CEO Jeanneret Momberg. Endorsed by the Stellenbosch municipality, Stellenbosch University, the Cape Winelands district municipality and Wesgro, the Support Stellenbosch campaign calls on residents to support local business, experience Stellenbosch as tourists, and inspire their networks to discover what Stellenbosch has to offer, in times of Covid-19 and beyond. Support Stellenbosch initiatives include an online directory of restaurants, accommodation and experiences which are Stellenbosch Ready, having adopted Visit Stellenbosch’s safety and hygiene protocols, endorsed by the World Travel and Tourism Council. “On Saturday, September 5, we kick off a Support Stellenbosch month with a fresh new rewards campaign where locals and visitors will receive a voucher to the value of 50% of what they spend (for transactions of R200 or more), redeemable through SnapScan at any participating restaurant within the campaign period (capped at a maximum of R400). "There are also special travel packages, accommodation and experience discounts,” explains Momberg. The town’s Stellenbosch on Stage series will continue with a performance by Stellenbosch University alumni on September 24. Besides access to the event, ticket holders will receive a R100 voucher to be redeemed at participating Stellenbosch businesses. Support Stellenbosch will also include a special Showcase of the town for locals in the last weekend in September, October and November, providing locals with special offers.