VH Fibre Optics, part of Alviva Holdings, is expanding its portfolio and repositioning its offerings toward closing the availability gap of fast and stable connectivity in rural and semi-rural areas. The group will deliver an end-to-end offering and new solutions that bring cost-effective connectivity options as an alternative to long-distance fibre. Large parts of South Africa remain without access to high-speed bandwidth, and this has had severe implications as the country implemented a lockdown and restrictions in response to the Covid-19 pandemic, said VH Fibre Optics MD Johan Kleynhans. “Many learners were left behind when schools moved online, businesses that could not operate online were compelled to close, and opportunities for telemedicine were not available. With uncertainty still hanging over the future, it is a long overdue requirement to address this connectivity gap,” he explained. VH Fibre Optics is supplementing the existing fibre footprint with innovative wireless solutions combining technologies such as TV White Space, V and E band wireless radios and WiFi. “These types of solutions are ideal for the South African and larger Southern African Development Community (SADC) market, as broadcast networks are already pervasive throughout the country, including in areas where it is currently not cost-effective to deploy fibre solutions,” he pointed out. The combination and use of these wireless technologies provide the crucial link for connectivity until critical mass and the viability of fibre is established in rural and semi-rural areas. The VH Fibre Optics end-to-end offering also comprises design, planning, deployment, compliance, testing, maintenance and support, which will empower individuals, businesses and industries in previously disconnected areas to make use of the multitude of benefits attached to high-speed connectivity. VH Fibre Optics will also operate on a build and transfer model, which enables network operators to take on a fully developed network and extend their reach and services into outlying areas. “Our hybrid solution will enable our open-access fibre and wireless network clients to expand their market, helping all of South Africa to compete on a global stage and bringing economic stimulus,” Kleynhans commented. There are also numerous opportunities in the SADC, as lack of connectivity is a common challenge across the region. “Fibre is not as prevalent in Africa as other regions across the world, and these alternative hybrid technologies have a significant role to play in connecting the continent. Our goal is to tailor our solutions to address the specific challenges in each market instead of using a one-size-fits-all approach, with the ultimate aim of bridging the connectivity gap. “It is the key to progress and empower businesses and individuals across not just South Africa, but the SADC and the rest of Africa,” Kleynhans concluded.