Digital platform security company Irdeto has integrated its watermarking solution, TraceMark for Distribution, with IBM’s file transfer solution, Aspera on Cloud, offering the film industry a fast-to-market, easy to implement, affordable solution towards the fight against piracy. The full integration of TraceMark and Aspera on Cloud eliminates the need for costly integrations of the two workflows required to transfer and watermark files, replacing it with fast deployments that scale to any number of distributed files and downloads, the companies said in a statement. The simple user-interface for package sending takes the complexity out of watermarking, with customers able to watermark video files while the content is being distributed to an end-user. Further, Irdeto introduced a new, pay-for-use model that enables customers to pay for the number of files they watermark, rather than having a one-size-fits-all yearly fee. Customers can elect to subscribe for watermarking or detection services separately. The pre-integration and the new business model make watermarking accessible to content owners and post-production houses of all sizes. Irdeto’s TraceMark for Distribution, along with its Online Piracy Detection solution, enables content owners, broadcasters and over-the-top providers to efficiently protect content at all stages of the value chain, while also addressing the different security threats faced by distribution partners in various regions. Advancements in technology and increasing broadband access have made it easier than ever for pirates to steal and share high-quality content over the Internet, with the worldwide revenue lost to video pirate operations estimated to exceed $61-billion in 2020 and $67-billion by 2023. IBM Aspera offers a hosted service that enables organisations to securely and reliably move large files across on-premises and multicloud environments at unrivalled speeds. The platform is widely used by all major studios and many content distributors, and the integration with Irdeto’s watermarking solution will now allow all players in the ecosystem to secure their content. “Content distributors invest an incredible amount of resources into ensuring great programming reaches end-users quickly and smoothly, and piracy is an ever-present threat. Irdeto and IBM Aspera have made an industry-leading move by providing a one-stop-shop to fight content redistribution and piracy,” said IBM Aspera worldwide offering management lead Sachin Agarwal. “If you look at the challenges that we see in the market today, there is this multibillion-dollar race on the content side, and as a company, we have invested a lot over the last decade to help disrupt the streaming piracy network. TraceMark is just one more anti-piracy solution in Irdeto’s vast cybersecurity arsenal,” said Irdeto video entertainment COO Shane McCarthy.