BMW Group South Africa (BMW SA) has appointed GridCars as its official electric vehicle charge point operator, with effect from September 1. The local arm of the German manufacturer says the responses from existing BMW i3 drivers were considered before the conclusion of a new three-year agreement with the charging infrastructure specialist. An enhanced customer experience and access to Gridcar’s extensive countrywide network were also instrumental in securing the deal, says BMW SA. Customers who make use of GridCars’ charge points will still be able to enjoy free access to BMW or Mini-branded public charging stations, adds the company. Other features that BMW SA customers might enjoy include the ability to actively manage charge sessions using Gridcar’s web-based app, receiving real-time information on charge point availability and, at a later stage, a customer rewards programme. The deal with GridCars comes as BMW SA prepares for the market introduction of the first fully electric Mini, the Mini Cooper SE, in October. “As a very exciting Mini model is added to further expand the BMW group’s leading position in electrification, we now have an opportunity to also act on our loyal BMW i customers’ advice,” says BMW Group South Africa and Sub-Sahara Africa CEO Tim Abbott. “In future, customers who drive either a BMW or Mini electric vehicle will benefit from a simplified charging process and the increased efficiencies that spring from our renewed partnership with GridCars.” “GridCars is looking forward to engaging with BMW SA’s customers to add value to their charging experience, using the extended charging network now available across the country,” notes GridCars MD Winstone Jordaan. “The launch of the electric Mini is exciting and it will be a valuable addition to the broader electric vehicle offering in South Africa.” South Africans can currently buy the BMW i3 and Jaguar I-Pace when on the market for an electric car. Mercedes-Benz, Porsche and Volkswagen are also looking at introducing electric models in the near future.