As South Africa battles the spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19), President Cyril Ramaphosa has pointed out that the national lockdown has revealed a “very sad fault line” in society. To date, the country has recorded 3 158 confirmed Covid-19  cases and 54 deaths. In his weekly message to the country, the President said while the lockdown was instituted to save lives, it has also revealed how poverty, inequality and unemployment were negatively affecting communities. He highlighted the recent scenes of South Africans protesting against food shortages and people lining up for food parcels at distribution centres. “There can be no greater anguish than that of a parent whose children cry out to them for food, but they have none to give. There can be no greater injustice than a society where some live in comfort and plenty, while others struggle at the margins to survive with little or nothing at all,” said Ramaphosa. He said while this was the residual effect of the country’s unequal past, it was also an indication of fundamental failing in the country’s post-apartheid society. He went on to address allegations he calls “disturbing and disgusting”. “A number of provinces have received reports that callous individuals, some of them allegedly government officials, are hoarding or selling food parcels earmarked for the needy and destitute, or diverting them to their friends and families. If there is found to be substance to these allegations we will deal with the individuals concerned harshly,” he assured. Ramaphosa acknowledged shortcomings in government’s support to the country’s most disadvantaged citizens during the pandemic, but he promised that food distribution systems were being streamlined and also pointed out that social grant payments were rolling out smoothly.
 
However, he noted that imposing a nationwide lockdown at extremely short notice did create challenges and explained that government had to balance its response to the pandemic, as well as the restrictions imposed on South Africans.
 
“We ultimately chose to err on the side of caution. And as the presentation by the Ministry of Health last week indicated, enforcing a lockdown at the time we did has slowed down the rate of infection and, more importantly, bought us time to prepare for a probable surge in infections in the coming weeks and months. We had to consider the impact on an already floundering economy in both the long and short term, and the impact of this substantial disruption on the livelihoods of millions of people,’ Ramaphosa explained.
 
Cabinet will finalise measures to respond to the impact of the lockdown on the livelihoods of South Africans and government’s social partners have made proposals on interventions that could address the immediate vulnerability of the poorest of the poor, most of whom rely on social assistance to survive.
 
He promised that government will scale up welfare provision during the pandemic to help households living below the poverty line.
 
“Even when the nation-wide lockdown is lifted, its effects will continue to be felt for some time to come. Those fortunate to have a steady income will be able to return to their jobs; but for millions of others this will be a lost month where they would otherwise have found temporary work, done business in the informal sector or saved money earned to meet their family responsibilities,” Ramaphosa said.
 
He added that while food support is a short-term emergency measure, it  needed sustainable solutions to help the country’s most vulnerable for expected difficult eventualities.
 
Ramaphosa thanked nongovernment organisations, religious groups and citizens who are donating money and volunteering to help feed the hungry and poor. He said, this week, government will announce measures to protect South Africans from starvation. “Alleviating hunger is not an act of charity. It is an imperative for any society that is founded on respect for human rights. We are at a point in our battle with the pandemic where complacency could prove disastrous. I call on each and every one to remain vigilant, to continue to abide by the regulations, and to keep safe and keep others safe. Among the many difficulties our people face at this time, wondering where their next meal will come from should not be one of them,” said the President.