Electronic, mechanical and industrial tools and products company RS Components highlights free digital resources that organisations can use for three-dimensional (3D) printing of a variety of medical components and products to combat the Covid-19 pandemic. With the Covid-19 outbreak snowballing its way across the globe, medical supplies such as face masks, respirators and ventilators have become scarce. "This shortage of essential equipment has united design engineers and makers in the 3D printing community who have already responded to the global crisis by volunteering their respective skills to ease the pressure on manufacturers, healthcare providers and governments," says RS Components sub-Saharan Africa MD Brian Andrew. Specialised masks, equipment components and breathing apparatus are being 3D printed to supply the healthcare sector. Andrew highlights four free resources for digital printers to use, including a protective face shield, makers mask, a valve for ventilators and the RS Components-designed hands-free door opener. 3D printers can use the resources https://www.rs-online.com/designspark/stop-the-coronavirus-spread-with-3d-printing/ to make a hands-free door opener; https://www.prusaprinters.org/prints/25857-prusa-protective-face-shield-rc2/ to make protective face shields; https://www.geekwire.com/2020/maker-mask-launches-seattle-using-3d-printing-technology-produce-protective-gear/ to print makers masks; and https://www.3dprintingmedia.network/covid-19-3d-printed-valve-for-reanimation-device/ to print valves for ventilators. "Even developed countries are seeing their healthcare systems overloaded and fatigued by Covid-19. In more severe cases, infected patients may require specialist ventilators to take over the role of the lungs. These ventilators are in short supply along with masks and other preventative and safety gear." 3D printing is helping people to "think out of the box" and share their designs for free in the hope that it will help lower the infection rate, Andrew says. 3D printers have become far more affordable since their introduction, helping to make the technology highly accessible. The 3D printing phenomena has infiltrated almost every industry, assisting in conceptualising, prototyping as well as small batch production of parts and components. There has been a significant increase in interest in 3D printers over recent years. "In the medical industry specifically, 3D printing has brought innovation into the medical industry and 3D printing is continuously being used to better the lives of patients as well as revolutionise surgeries for doctors globally. An example is last year’s pioneering surgical procedure using 3D-printed middle ear bones, developed by Professor Mashudu Tshifularo and his team at the University of Pretoria in South Africa. "The 3D printing community has proved that this technology is here to stay and that anyone with an idea can literally see their idea come to life,” concludes Andrew.