Luxury train service, The Blue Train, is extending its current suspension of services, which were supposed to resume on April 30, to June 30, amid the nationwide lockdown in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The Blue Train decided on the further suspension after a further analysis of the situation by the operations team and after the South African government’s pronouncement on April 23 of the adjusted risk strategy for economic activity, which still heavily impacts on the travel and tourism industry. During this period of suspension, the team at The Blue Train will continue to comply with the government’s directives of working from home, physical distancing and the use of personal protective equipment to ensure the safety of all South Africans. The period of suspension will also enable the development and implementation of screening measures that will ensure the safety of the staff and guests of The Blue Train. At the commencement of the suspension of services in March, The Blue Train apprised its booked, paid and confirmed guests of changes to the cancellation policy to accommodate resultant travel disruptions. These changes remain in place and give guests who were to travel on The Blue Train from March 18 to August 31 three options. Guests can choose a ticket transfer, whereby they can transfer tickets to friends and family who can travel from June 1 to August 31. Guests can also postpone their travel on The Blue Train to any date that falls within September 1 to December 31. Only one postponement will be allowed during the 69 weeks. The third option involves cancellation, whereby guests can cancel confirmed bookings and receive a full refund. Neither of these options will result in penalties. For transfers, postponements and cancellations of travel after August 31, The Blue Train’s standard terms and conditions will apply. Guests who are booked but are yet to pay and therefore are unconfirmed will incur applicable costs commensurate with the ticket cost as per the date of postponement. Any costs or expenses incurred as a result of the postponement such as flights, accommodation, transfers, excursions and other costs, would be at the customers’ expense. The duration of the suspension will be reviewed at the end of May, pending further pronouncements by the government of South Africa on the national response to the Covid-19 pandemic.