Pumps critical to the provision of water and sanitation services, as well as pumps used in the generation of electricity, are being fully supported during the nationwide Covid-19 lockdown period, says supplier KSB Pumps and Valves. It assures end-users that it has far-reaching contingency plans in place to ensure that any of its mission-critical pumps and other pumping infrastructure across industries are properly supported. Company spokesperson and sub-Saharan Africa regional sales manager David Jones says the company supplies large-scale pumps for the distribution of potable water to the entire Southern African region. “During this time of crisis, we will do everything in our power to support our water utilities and municipalities to ensure uninterrupted supply of clean water to all communities. "The same applies to sanitation services, where wastewater and sewerage handling is equally important to fight diseases and infection. Our technicians and engineers are on round-the-clock standby to ensure pumps in these services run smoothly.” He adds that KSB has also played a crucial role in retrofitting and rejuvenating old pumps and steam valves in State-owned utility Eskom’s power station fleet to keep the country’s lights burning. Pumping infrastructure for other mission critical operations such as supporting the country’s vast petrochemical operations, dewatering mines, pollution mitigation, agricultural and other operations will also receive technical assistance from the company. “Although the company’s day-to-day operations have ceased in accordance with President Cyril Ramaphosa’s shutdown directives, it is our duty to provide robust technical and support services to mission critical services and industries,” says Jones. The company highlights important contact information for reaching its staff during this time. Emergencies – potable water services, sanitation and wastewater, power generation, petrochemical: frikkie.botma@ksb.com; 083 409 5757 Critical services valves sales: jonas.moloto@ksb.com; 063 684 6040 Valve service: koos.taljaard@ksb.com; 072 096 2889 Pump service: grant.glennister@ksb.com; 083 784 4167 General enquiries: info-za@ksb.com / saleszaksb.com