The benefits of the Internet of Things (IoT) are only fully realised if the data from IoT devices are integrated on an intelligent platform that allows for the information to be analysed and used to automate and improve processes, says information and communication technology service provider and system integrator NEC XON digital transformation head Gregg Sanders. Integrating the information from sensors and correlating the data on an intelligent platform allows for digital transformation of processes by allowing companies to create, digitise and automate processes. An example is the way in which telecommunications service providers respond to faults. "Traditionally, service providers monitor all the systems on a cell tower through separate platforms that alert operators, who must make judgment calls on what caused problems and how they should respond. It leaves a lot of room for human error and relies on the experience of the operators. "Instead, the service provider now collates the monitored data into one database, adds human resources information such as skills, training, expertise, shift information, responsibilities, vehicle tracking and more, and integrates that with the financial and asset management systems." The ability to correlate events at the tower shows where faults first occurred for root-cause analysis. It shows what components and systems are affected downstream and the operators can instantly see which service provider is responsible for the affected systems, and which of their people are best qualified and geographically located to respond. "We were then able to automate the process. Now, when a fault occurs, we alert operations teams that automatically deploys the best-qualified engineer who’s closest. It cut the time to repair faults by 300% and human error is massively down. As a bonus, a by-product of monitoring all of the equipment on a site is that we now maintain a living asset register for those sites." The service provider is now also able to use cameras to improve security and safety at towers and use the same cameras capable of recognising faces and vehicle registration numbers to check that employees wear the correct protective gear. The physical gate locks are remotely managed so unrecognised people or people wearing incorrect equipment cannot access the sites. Also, workers or managers are alerted when they get too close to dangerous equipment, highlights Sanders. The same technology can be used to power a cloud-based facial and behavioural analytics system for security companies in South Africa that identifies known criminals in real-time. It transforms security from reactive to proactive, he adds. Mines use facial recognition technology to quickly and accurately identify thousands of workers during shift changes so they can pick out illegal miners trying to blend into the throng. It also provides mine operators and managers with vital information of who is on the mine during emergencies. "Digital transformation changes the way we interact with devices and sensors to create true benefit. You can apply the same logic to virtually any industry from telecoms to mining, agriculture, transport and logistics, even financial services and retail. The benefits of connecting previously isolated and disparate systems quickly become apparent. But that is just the starting point. To see really revolutionary change, you need a transformational mindset." The applications are nearly limitless, Sanders adds.