President Cyril Ramaphosa outlined various measures to support companies and workers, including a R200-billion loan guarantee scheme to assist enterprises negatively affected by the Covid-19 lockdown, as part of a broader R500-billion social and economic relief package unveiled on Tuesday night. The package, released following extensive consultations with stakeholders and after two special Cabinet meetings, is designed to respond to the devastating economic and social fallout that has accompanied government’s response to the pandemic. The response is widely accepted to have been necessary to ensure that the Covid-19 virus did not spread at a pace that overwhelmed the country’s health system. Nevertheless, it has left firms at risk of closure, is threatening millions of jobs and is already resulting in severe hunger among the country’s most vulnerable citizens. In a televised address 25-days into a lockdown instituted on March 26 and which will persist until the end of April, Ramaphosa acknowledged that the response had “disrupted your lives and damaged our economy”. He said the pandemic required an economic response equal to the scale of the disruption it was causing and described the emergency relief programme as "historic". The support for companies and workers forms part of the a four-part package that also includes an extraordinary health Budget to strengthen the fight against the virus; a series of measure designed to relieve hunger and social distress and plans for a phased re-opening of the economy. Full details of the adjustment Budget will be tabled by Finance Minister Tito Mboweni in the coming days, while Ramaphosa will address the nation again on Thursday April 23 to provide additional details regarding the further phased re-opening of the economy. A major new feature of government's support for business was Ramaphosa’s confirmation of a R200-billion loan guarantee scheme, which would be implemented in partnership with South Africa’s major banks, the National Treasury and the South African Reserve Bank. “This will assist enterprises with operational costs, such as salaries, rent and the payment of suppliers.” In the initial phase, companies with a turnover of less than R300-million a year would be eligible and it was anticipated that the scheme would support over 700 000 firms and more than three-million employees through this difficult period. “A number of the banks are ready to roll out the product before the end of the month,” Ramaphosa announced.