Telecommunications giant MTN Group will deploy a R250-million relief package across its operations in an effort to aid the fight against the Covid-19 pandemic. The group will customise its response, with the package focused on five key intervention initiatives, namely for its employees, customers and vulnerable groups, as well as contributions to the South Africa’s Solidarity Fund and participating in industry interventions. “We believe it is the responsibility of all organisations to assist where they can during the pandemic. MTN plays a vital role in the mobile and telecommunications industry across Africa and the Middle East and it is vital that we assist our employees, customers and stakeholders during this difficult time,” said MTN Group chairperson Mcebisi Jonas. The South African firm plans to raise R40-million, through contributions from the group’s directors, managers and general staff, for the MTN Global Staff Emergency Fund for employees in need. The group’s chairperson, CEO, CFO and several other directors have pledged 30% of their board fees and salaries for the next three months. “The executive teams of both MTN Group and MTN South Africa have also contributed to the fund. In addition, other staff members can also contribute by making salary sacrifices,” he said. Another R150-million will be invested in the Y’ello Hope Package for customers, which will include free SMS services, the waiving of fees for certain mobile money transactions, discounted calling during off-peak periods, zero-rating of certain health, social services and educational sites and payment concessions to business customers. MTN Foundations across its markets have also been mobilised to contribute at least R50-million towards tackling health emergencies to minimise the spread of Covid-19 and enable students to access vital school and university content. “Using our services and technologies for the greater good is key at the moment. We can positively impact millions of lives and our main focus is on keeping our network in good working order and enable our customers to connect with their loved ones during this most difficult time for all,” said MTN Group president and CEO Rob Shuter. About R10-million will also be injected into the Solidarity Fund.