Market research and consultancy firm Ipsos has reminded governments to not take their eyes off the issue of climate change amid the Covid-19 pandemic. The firm notes that eight in every ten South Africans surveyed online believed at the start of this year that average temperatures would increase during the year. This opinion was shared by 77% of citizens surveyed across the world. The South African respondents to Ipsos’ survey identified global warming, or climate change, as the biggest environmental concern, followed by water pollution and future energy sources. “Apart from the issue of global warming and climate change, the South African response to this question reflects the environmental issues we have dealt with over the last few years of droughts and the Eskom, or energy supply, crisis. “Combating water pollution, ensuring high-quality water and the availability of future energy sources are mentioned by about a third of online South Africans. As the size of the population places stress on scarce resources, three in every ten also want leaders to give attention to this issue,” the firm explains. Worldwide, two-thirds of people surveyed by Ipsos agreed that government actions should prioritise climate change issues in the economic recovery planning for “the day after tomorrow”− after the Covid-19 crisis. A  high proportion, or 84%, of online South Africans agreed that if South Africa’s government does not act now to combat climate change, it will be failing the people of South Africa. Ipsos says voting behaviour in South Africa is entrenched and voters seldom change the party they vote for in an election, but almost two-thirds (64%) agreed that if a political party’s policies do not deal seriously with climate change, this would put people off voting for them. “Although we should see this as a prompt for political parties to formulate viable environmental policies, it is important to keep in mind that this study was carried out online – covering almost two-thirds of the South African adult population – results are therefore not nationally representative,” the firm highlights. Ipsos South Africa director and political analyst Mari Harris says it is interesting to note that the same proportion, namely 84%, of online South Africans expressed the belief in 2014 and again in 2020, that human activities contribute to climate change. “And, although much more can be done to encourage citizens to change behaviour, to limit their influences, six in every ten online South Africans are saying that they are prepared to avoid buying products with a lot of packaging and are prepared to recycle materials such as glass, paper and plastic. “Policymakers can definitely help entrench these positive climate behaviours, especially by enabling and encouraging South Africans to recycle on a much larger scale,” she states. Another Ipsos survey done between April 16 and 19 was conducted in 14 countries, excluding South Africa, and found that 71% of adults globally agree that, in the long term, climate change is as serious a crisis as Covid-19 is. The survey shows widespread support for government actions to prioritise climate change in the economic recovery after Covid-19, with 65% globally agreeing that this is important. The survey was conducted online among more than 28 000 adults. “There is real support among the public for a green economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis, and climate change remains the single biggest environmental concern globally. “What remains to be seen, however, is whether and how people plan to change their behaviour to combat climate change when they adjust to a new life once the Covid-19 pandemic passes,” says Ipsos UK member Kelly Beaver.