Internet activity has spiked across the country during the lockdown and South Africans should be careful about the type of content they consume, says financial comparison website QuotesAdvisor.com. Given the importance of Internet connections during the lockdown to keep people connected for work, the company questions if the Internet will collapse in these times owing to the high number of people using it at the same time. Data traffic in South Africa is estimated to have increased 15% in recent weeks and it is expected to continue to increase. Not only are more people working from home, making use of collaboration services to communicate with colleagues, but many are also making use of online video streaming to keep themselves entertained while in lockdown. QuotesAdvisor.com says the country’s networks seem to be prepared to handle the increased traffic, but warns that there may be challenges. “Every Internet infrastructure is capable of supporting a slight increase in traffic. But some back-end functions, online tools or regular websites, may experience problems if they haven´t anticipated the increase in traffic at the right time,” says QuotesAdvisor.com CEO Christian Rennella. It urges South Africans to use the Internet responsibly. “We are warned not only that some platforms may have problems if they do not have the necessary resources required for an increase in user traffic but also that many people connected to the same home network can slow down traffic and ruin our online tasks,” warns the company. To avoid this type of inconvenience, UK government communications industry regulator Ofcom recommends making responsible use of the Internet during the lockdown. It proposes recommendations such as using landline or WiFi calls if possible; disconnecting devices that are not being used from the WiFi network; and using an ethernet cable instead of wireless connection if possible for a better and faster connection. It also recommends testing the Internet speed from a computer, advisably at different times during the day, to discern when the connection is better.