The Automotive Industry Development Centre (AIDC) has assisted Vusi Mkhize, the owner and CEO of the Mumbo Group, to produce a no-touch, non-electronic hand sanitiser dispenser. AIDC mentored Mkhize by identifying companies and expertise in the automotive industry that could assist with the detailed design, as well as a 100%-black owned company in Boksburg that could produce the product. The final product is the result of a collaboration between Naicker Tool Makers, the Mumbo Group and Teq Design Central. Naicker Tool Makers, which has been part of the AIDC’s supplier development programme, manufactures the product in Boksburg, while Teq Design Central was responsible for the design. Mkhize at the end of March approached the business development department of the AIDC with his concept, and requested support to industrialise his product. “The automotive sector knows how to produce in high volumes, which is why the AIDC was my first port of call for assistance in manufacturing technology,” says Mkhize. The hand sanitiser dispenser is foot operated and can be reloaded by any person with no special tools required. The sanitiser station is ideal for all doorways where the public or staff enter a building, says Mkhize. The device is mobile, but can also be affixed permanently. Mkhize says he hopes to see the station at every entrance in the country. He has already delivered an order of 50 dispensers to government. The current manufacturing volume is 100 units a day. This can be increased to meet demand as the operation has a capacity of 500 units a day. The price is dependent on volume, but it should be less than R1 950. “This is the time for cooperation between organisations with complementary capabilities that operate in the automotive space,” says AIDC CEO Lance Schultz. “This is also an indication that the tier two industry can rapidly localise automotive components to achieve the goal of 60% local content for vehicles as targeted in South African Automotive Masterplan.”