The World Health Organisation (WHO) has reported that the number of confirmed coronavirus (Covid-19) has surpassed the 10 000 mark in Africa, with over 500 deaths. In a statement, WHO raised concerns that while the virus was slow to reach the continent, the infection has grown exponentially in recent weeks and continues to spread. The virus reached the continent through travellers returning from hotspots in Asia, Europe and the US. Africa’s first Covid-19 case was recorded in Egypt on February 14. To date a total of 52 African countries have reported cases. WHO regional director for Africa Dr Matshidiso Moeti said Covid-19 has the potential not only to cause thousands of deaths, but also to unleash economic and social devastation. “Its spread beyond major cities means the opening of a new front in our fight against this virus. This requires a decentralised response, which is tailored to the local context. Communities need to be empowered, and provincial and district levels of government need to ensure they have the resources and expertise to respond to outbreaks locally,” said Moeti. He explained that the WHO is working with governments across Africa to scale up their capacities in critical response areas such as coordination, surveillance, testing, isolation, case management, contact tracing, infection prevention and control, risk communication and community engagement, and laboratory capacity. Moeti reported that Ghana, Kenya, Ethiopia, Egypt, Morocco, Tunisia and Nigeria have expanded national testing to multiple labs, allowing for decentralised testing to fight the spread of Covid-19. He explained that the adopted combined measures will ensure the rapid identification of cases, the tracking down and quarantining of contacts and the isolation and treatment of patients. Moeti emphasised the importance of providing people with accurate information, which will promote healthy behaviours. Furthermore, he said the protection of health workers is a vital component of the response and that when governments implement physical distancing measures, the basic needs of people should be taken into account. WHO regional director for the Eastern Mediterranean Dr Ahmed Al-Mandhari said Africa still has an opportunity to reduce and slow down disease transmission. “All countries must rapidly accelerate and scale up a comprehensive response to the pandemic, including an appropriate combination of proven public health and physical distancing measures,” he said. He added that within that process, African leaders should target effective control of the outbreak and plan for the worst. “Early isolation of all cases, including mild cases, is one of the key control measures, along with early detection, early treatment and contact tracing. Timely and accurate epidemiological data is one of the most important tools to inform and drive the response. We must protect our health care workers and ensure that they are appropriately equipped – they are on the front lines and need our unwavering support.  We owe them a great deal,” Al-Mandhari added. WHO says it remains concerned about the impact of the pandemic on countries with fragile health systems and those experiencing complex emergencies. It says the international community should extend technical and financial support to these countries to enhance response capacities to minimise the spread of the outbreak. Of great concern is that some countries in Africa may not have adequate intensive care unit capacity such as beds, ventilators and trained personal. To date South Africa has recorded over 1 600 confirmed cases of Covid-19 with 12 deaths.