The Department of Trade, Industry and Competition (DTIC) has advised of an additional permission process that essential services providers have to undertake as South Africa moves into an extended lockdown. The department explains that companies that registered through the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission’s (CIPC’s) BizPortal to perform essential services during the lockdown, will be required to have a new certificate from the BizPortal website for the extended period that begins on April 17. The certificate will be sent by email using the details provided at the time of registration and will also be available for download from April 17. The department points out that the certificates issued before April 17 will no longer be valid. “The new certificate will clearly state that it is for the extended lockdown period starting April 17, and the South African Police Service officials will be told which certificates to look for,” DTIC says. The department reminds the public that possession of the CIPC certificate is still subject to the company fully complying with the applicable lockdown regulations and is a record of the company’s details, and does not in itself constitute the right to continue operating during the period. Only businesses that provide essential services in terms of the lockdown regulations, as amended, issued by the Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, may continue their operations during the Covid-19 lockdown. The DTIC clarifies that the registration portal is only for companies registered in terms of the Companies Act. Other essential service providers, like healthcare professionals registered with the Health Professions Council of South Africa, sole proprietors who provide essential goods and services (such as small business owners and spaza shops, and small-scale farmers will not register through the BizPortal. These businesses will not have a CIPC certificate, but must still comply with the provisions of the lockdown regulations. The regulations for the extended lockdown have also clarified that the transportation of liquor is prohibited, except where alcohol is required for industries producing hand sanitisers, disinfectants, soap, alcohol for industrial use and household cleaning products. To confirm if your business complies, consult the necessary regulation at https://www.gov.za/documents/disaster-management-act-regulations-address-prevent-and-combat-spread-coronavirus-covid-19.