German-owned abrasive product manufacturer PFERD South Africa says that although the impact of the lockdown will be felt across all businesses within the country over years to come, there is also an opportunity for local businesses to grow, considering the lack, or reduced ability to, import goods or source services from international destinations. Particularly, PFERD says it has a world-class business in South Africa, with the expertise and suite of products available to compete with internationally-sourced products and services. PFERD national sales manager Dennis Phillips says the lockdown has had a major impact on every South African and the economy as a whole. Leading up to and during the lockdown, the company has been making every effort to continue supplying the essential services that were allowed to operate. Phillips notes that the global pressure on the supply chain can certainly be felt worldwide for all businesses, but PFERD's South African operation has made the necessary contingency plans to ensure it is able to continue operating, including the local manufacturing of abrasive products. The company has implemented strict hygiene measures at all its offices across the country. “Although we have to continue operations where possible, we have a responsibility to ensure a safe working and business environment for our staff and our customers,” Phillips points out. He further says the company has changed processes within the business to allow staff to work from home where possible, which necessitated the implementation of numerous digital processes to ensure continuity of supply. Phillips says PFERD has been fortunate in that its product range is used across a range of industries, including power generation, water treatment, transport, pharmaceuticals and plant maintenance. “South Africa has been through many trying times, we are certain that we will once again overcome this as well, and we will be much stronger afterwards. PFERD South Africa has been supporting to local industry with quality products since 1968 and we will do everything possible to ensure we continue doing so in the future,” concludes Phillips. PFERD is a leader in the development, production, support and distribution of abrasive tool solutions for surface preparation, finishing and cutting. PFERD offers the ideal solution for every application and its product range comprises more than 8 500 products for use on a diverse range of materials and across various industries.