The death toll from the coronavirus pandemic in South Africa has increased to 65, according to figures released by Health Minister Zweli Mkhize on Wednesday. “Today, we regrettably report seven more Covid-19 related deaths. Five of them occurred in the Western Cape and two in KwaZulu-Natal. This increases the total to 65,” Mkhize said in a statement. “We express our condolences to the affected families and appreciate the health workers who treated these patients.” Mkhize also announced on Wednesday that the total number of confirmed Covid-19 cases in South Africa had increased to 3 635. “The total number of tests conducted to date is 133 774, of which 6 868 were done in the last 24 hours,” the minister said. Gauteng still leads with the highest number of infections (1 224) followed by the Western Cape with 1 079 infections and KwaZulu-Natal with 758. The Eastern Cape, which has the fourth highest infections (377) is cause for concern, says the health minister who visited the province on Tuesday and Wednesday. Mkhize on Tuesday deployed medical experts to the province to assist the local team. Deputy director general: clinical services, Dr Litha Matiwane, has been assigned to Port Elizabeth to oversee and manage the Covid-19 team and its efforts to flatten of the curve in Nelson Mandela Bay. Mkhize told journalists at the press briefing in Nelson Mandela Bay that after an urgent meeting with national and district health officials, they had decided on rapid action to deal with the pandemic. Within the next two weeks, he said, the department of public works would prepare more hospitals to admit patients. He also said that additional staff would be recruited and that more vehicles for mass screening and testing in the district would be brought to the metro. Free State is in fifth position, with 106 infections, while all four of the other provinces still show infection rates below 30. South Africa is currently going through an extended national lockdown announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa on 23 March. The countrywide lockdown permits only certain categories of businesses and entities providing “essential services” to remain open. The lockdown is accompanied by a string of regulations that limit the movement of citizens, who are expected to stay at home unless they are shopping for food, seeking medical help or supplies, banking, buying petrol, collecting social grants, or performing essential services.