The US Agency for International Development (USAID) is funding Internet service provider TooMuchWifi’s initiative to offer free data to Western Cape communities to educate residents about ways to reduce Covid-19 infections. The R73 000 initiative is funded from the emergency reserve fund for contagious infectious diseases, which is part of USAID’s partnership with Breakthrough Action and South African nonprofit organisation the Centre for Communication Impact. “This is an example of the US government’s partnership with the local private sector to deliver effective solutions to underprivileged communities in developing countries. This moderate investment has reached thousands in communities of the Western Cape with Covid-19 messages,” said USAID Southern Africa mission director John Groarke. The project will enable the National Risk Communication and Community Engagement Technical Working Group to communicate urgent messages from the Department of Health and the Office of the President in real time through TooMuchWifi as a platform. TooMuchWifi, identified as a strategic vehicle to reach thousands in the Western Cape with Covid-19 messages, has operations in communities across Cape Town, including Dunoon, Joe Slovo, Phoenix, Langa, Gugulethu, Bonteheuwel, Manenberg, Vrygrond, Philippi, Crossroads, Nyanga, Imizamo Yethu, Hangberg, Mfuleni and Khayelitsha. Users will be able to read timely and accurate Covid-19 information and take a simple quiz about Covid-19. The information will touch on different topical issues to counter disinformation, encourage physical distancing and support those who may be at higher risk owing to tuberculosis or HIV. “Passing the quiz will transfer R5 into a user’s TooMuchWifi wallet, which converts to 500 MB that the person can use or send to family/friends to access any digital content they wish.” By April 28, more than 13 000 users had taken the quiz, with more than 6.6 GB of data distributed. To date, the US has provided R410-million in health assistance to support South Africa’s Covid-19 response and plans to provide further assistance as it monitors and responds to the Covid-19 pandemic.