Giant US aerospace and defence group Boeing announced on April 2 that it was, with effect from close of business on April 3, suspending production at its complex at Ridley Township (just south of Philadelphia International Airport in the US state of Pennsylvania) for two weeks, as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic. While the complex undertakes commercial and design engineering activities, its primary activity is the manufacture of military helicopters and tilt-rotor aircraft. “Suspending operations at our vital military rotorcraft facilities is a serious step, but a necessary one for the health and safety of our employees and their communities,” affirmed Boeing vertical lift VP and GM and Philadelphia site senior executive Steve Parker. “We’re working closely with government and public health officials in the tri-state region. We’re also in contact with our customers, suppliers and other stakeholders affected by this temporary suspension as we assist in the national effort to combat the spread of Covid-19.” Those employees who could work from home would do so. Those who could not would be given ten days paid leave (a period twice that prescribed in company policy). The production shutdown was planned to be an orderly affair, to assure alignment with the requirements of Boeing’s US and international defence customers. Personnel would return to work on April 20. Once the work suspension was lifted, production would be resumed in a manner that was orderly and focused on safety and quality as well as meeting the company’s commitments to its customers. While production was suspended, deep cleaning activities would be carried out at buildings in the complex. The company would also set out strict criteria for a resumption of work. It would furthermore maintain its monitoring of government advice and actions regarding Covid-19 and its related effects. The Boeing manufacturing facilities at Ridley Township produce the H-47 Chinook heavy-lift helicopter, the MH-139A Grey Wolf multi-mission helicopter and the V-22 Osprey tilt-rotor aircraft. (The twin engines of the Osprey are mounted at the tips of its wings and can be rotated vertically to allow it to take-off and land like a helicopter, and then, once airborne, be rotated to the horizontal so that it can fly like a conventional aeroplane.)