Minister of Health Dr Zweli Mkhize met with Eastern Cape Premier Oscar Mabuyane and Health MEC Sindisiwe Gomba on Tuesday, to assess the conversion project at the Cecilia Makiwane Hospital, in the Eastern Cape, in which a derelict part of the hospital would be converted to accommodate additional beds for coronavirus (Covid-19) patients. Mkhize said he was encouraged by the Eastern Cape in its preparations for the conversation, as government expects an increasing number of patients to be admitted to hospital during the pandemic. “This was a derelict part of the hospital which was going to be abandoned, but they have checked it and found that it was structurally sound and can be converted. So it will, in future, be converted into district hospital beds, which means we will not actually abandon it. Although there is a whole new wing of the hospital which was commissioned two years ago but in fact the additional infrastructure was very useful and I am quite certain we are on the right track," said Mkhize. He noted that there was additional space for a field hospital to be established. During his visit, Mkhize continued to discourage large gatherings and emphasised government’s concerns around funerals. “It is impossible to suspend funerals but what I think is fairly important is to teach people of where the cross-infections happen in funerals. Large crowd gatherings at funerals are still a challenge and we really need to teach people to reduce the attendance numbers. Some people will be crying and consoling each other; the closeness is the problem when you don’t even know who is infected or who isn’t. What I remember is that in the beginning of the coronavirus outbreak, the first people to test positive for this virus had been attending a funeral,” said Mkhize. He also warned that there was a risk  of infection during grave diggings through the sharing of digging equipment. He also warned against the sharing of food utensils during meals after funerals and urged mourners to continue using masks. “Covid-19 is going to force us to change the way we do things, we are not changing things just for fun but changing things as it is the only way to reduce cross-infections,” Mkhize said.