Small businesses need the nation to mobilise behind them more than ever before, is the word from nonprofit membership organisation, National Small Business Chamber (NSBC) founder and CEO Mike Anderson. The role that small businesses play in job creation, poverty alleviation, service delivery and wealth creation all mean that small business is big business, he posits. “Nearly two-thirds of all South African workers are employed by small businesses. Small businesses also contribute a significant portion of our country’s gross domestic product, which is why we’re encouraging the people of South Africa and big business to lend their support. "Small businesses are key to unlocking economic opportunities and achieving inclusive growth,” says Anderson. He highlights that one out of five units exported from South Africa is produced in the small and medium business sector. “Making a small change to where we spend our money can have a huge impact on small businesses, our communities and ultimately our economy,” Anderson points out. He notes that the advantages of supporting small businesses lie not only in making an impact on the economy, but also the positive difference it can make in uplifting local communities. “Locally owned businesses help shape strong communities by keeping vital spend within small towns and cities, leading to vibrant local economies that benefit all who live there. There are plenty of advantages for consumers too, very often small businesses care deeply about the kind of customer service they deliver; knowing that quality products and personalised service is what keeps their business thriving.” Small businesses across South Africa must be firmly in the spotlight, by encouraging the nation to support, visit and spend at a small business all year round, he emphasises. With more support, small businesses have the potential to breathe new life into the South African economy and play an even bigger role in economic growth and job creation, says Anderson. “Small businesses represent countless hours of hard work, commitment, resilience and thousands of jobs. When South Africans support the ‘small’, they make a big impact. Providing as much support to small businesses as possible is an investment in our communities and South Africa’s collective economic future. “The Covid-19 pandemic is an opportunity to bring about permanent change in the hearts of all South Africans. We want to encourage everyone in our country to support their local small businesses all day every day throughout the year. So, when you shop online or go out to shop, please make that all-important choice, support your local independent small businesses,” concludes Anderson.