Pretoria-based science and technology park, The Innovation Hub (TIH), requests local innovators; entrepreneurs; scientists; small, medium-sized and microenterprises; research institutions; universities; and the public to submit solutions that can help curb the spread of the Covid-19 virus. Through its Open Innovation Solution Exchange programme – a platform and process which connects solution-seekers to solution-providers – TIH is offering successful applicants the opportunity to test, develop, incubate and commercialise their solutions. Although bringing with it distressing circumstances, the international Covid-19 pandemic has resulted in some creative and innovative ideas stemming from the urgency of the situation and the need to act innovatively and quickly. “South Africa is no different, and we are taking this opportunity to call on local innovators to help our country fight this virus with solutions that take into account our unique challenges,” says TIH CEO advocate Pieter Holl. Submissions should address the direct and indirect societal effects of Covid-19 and be proven concepts that need maturation, or should be existing solutions that can be adapted. In addition, it is important that the solutions address the South African context. “As a country, we are unique in many ways. Our solutions should be too,” he notes. Examples of solutions include, but are not limited to disinfection of the environment, information sharing tools and platforms, medical solutions, physical distancing techniques, essential goods delivery, remote working solutions and solutions in the context of townships, rural areas and taxi ranks. Submissions can currently be made online at www.openix.co.za, until July 31, and will be judged on a variety of scientific, technical and commercial criteria. “Although the pandemic has amplified many of the challenges we face in South Africa, there is opportunity in the chaos. This is the chance for us to rise to the challenge and show our fellow citizens and the world that there is power in African innovation,” concludes Holl.