Veecraft Marine, a subsidiary of Paramount Maritime, has been awarded a Transnet National Ports Authority (TNPA) tender to design, manufacture and assemble two twin-screw, diesel-powered workboats to spearhead harbour activities. These activities include conventional escort, lighthouse services assistance and towing support for the bustling Cape Town port. The 19.5 m maritime vessels, manufactured with 60% local content, will feature a 7.25 m beam, fixed-pitched propellers and twin rudders, offering 15 t bollard pull (short tons-force). The vessels will assist in servicing small to medium-sized craft pilotage into the port, the towing of vessels, lashing up next to dead ships and undertaking conventional escort operations. This additional capacity at the port will have a direct and indirect impact cross-sector on industries operating within and around one of the most demanding trade routes in the world, serving as a critical component of the value chain of fishing companies in particular. The entrance channels to the dry-docks at the Port of Cape Town have been historically, extremely confined, with workboats the only vessels capable of servicing the area. Over the course of the past few decades, however, after years of service assisting more than 300 foreign fishing vessels every year, the existing vessels have suffered from fatigue and recurring breakdowns requiring regular maintenance which can be costly to maintain. Additionally, the older vessels are causing increased air pollution due to outdated engine technology, compounded by potential oil leakages into the fragile ocean environment. Recognised as an integral part of South Africa’s economy, the Cape Town port largely facilitates imports for regional consumption and exports of agricultural products, including the management of the largest amount of deciduous fruit and fish exports in the country. Veecraft Marine says this distinction has also led to the growth of world-class ship repair and maintenance services from the Port, accommodating both the local and foreign fishing industries alongside recreational boating. “It is our privilege offer the latest available technologies in both manufacturing and deploying these next-generation workboats to the Port of Cape Town, offering a dramatic reduction in cost of doing business, increased operational efficiencies, safer working conditions and a reduced carbon footprint in the process. “These are turnkey solutions pertinent to South African geo-commerce and the responsible use of our ‘Ocean Economy’, proudly in line with Veecraft’s nearly 20-year heritage,” comments Veecraft CEO Stuart McVitty.