Broadcaster MultiChoice is injecting funding of R4.5-million into three South African community television (TV) stations. Bay TV, Soweto TV and Tshwane TV stations will each receive R1.5-million to create fresh, new content. This followed a call for community TV stations across South Africa to submit original content proposals for a chance to secure funding. Each submission, which included locally produced reality shows to documentary series, current affairs programmes and comedy sitcoms, was reviewed in terms of originality and audience appeal. Bay TV will invest its portion into the production of a new reality show entitled ‘Ekhondweni Lobudoda’. “Our relationship with MultiChoice has enabled Bay TV to be the conduit of an Eastern Cape story. We are also confident that this investment will launch our prowess as a content generating channel,” said Bay TV chairperson Motse Mfuleni. Soweto TV CEO Thabo Molefe said that the investment would enable the station to bring new content to its schedule, invest in talent and empower new storytellers, while Tshwane TV sales and marketing director Collin McKenzie said that the investment would assist with content generation and contribute to the station’s sustainability and growth. MultiChoice recently provided equipment upgrades to the various stations, assisted with camera and production training and provided business training from Henley Business School for their management teams. “We are a leading investor in local content production and we are seeing day-by-day how our audiences are calling for more local content. For us, it is about broadening access to African storytelling and creating platforms for local content creators to tell their stories,” explained MultiChoice South Africa corporate affairs executive head Reggy Moalusi. The broadcaster also established an R80-million fund that will pay full salaries of cast, crew and creatives for the months of March and April to support the industry as it lock downs during the Covid-19 pandemic.