To glean insight into how South Africans are coping with their work and home lives, their views on the handling of the Covid-19 lockdown by the government, and their understanding of the disease, best-practice consultancy Consulta surveyed more than 1 000 South Africans who are part of its online research community – known as ConsultaPanel – between April 6 to 10. Forty-eight per cent of respondents said the government has handled the lockdown and pandemic crisis very well, while 52% believe it has not been handled well at all. Of those who feel that the government is doing a good job, 72% said they feel the lockdown was the best possible option and feel it is being enforced appropriately. Ten per cent are happy with the fact that more testing stations are being made available, particularly in high-risk areas, while 9% mentioned that the regulations have been communicated clearly and widely. Of the 52% of respondents who feel the government has not done a good job, 23% are concerned about the ability of the country’s health system to handle the growing need when the number of infections increase, while a further 23% feel that the lockdown regulations have not been well coordinated. Twelve per cent are unsure whether physical distancing will be effective or even possible in densely populated areas, while 10% are deeply concerned about the economic impact that the lockdown will have in the medium to long term. WORK IMPACT Seven out of every ten participants indicated that they would continue to work during the lockdown period. Of the respondents who participated, 14% are employed in essential services in healthcare, pharmaceutical, financial services/banks, supermarkets, manufacturing and the transport of essential goods. These respondents also consider themselves to be the most at-risk group to contract the virus as a result of the work they do. Seven per cent are teachers waiting for normal schooling to resume (most of whom are using communications platforms to teach from home), while the remainder are employed in other industries, are retired or unemployed. Half of all respondents expect a decline in their income during this time, while the other half are more optimistic, reporting that they expect their income to remain stable at least until the end of lockdown. Those who are self-employed believe they will be most negatively impacted. Retirees do not share the same level of concern and believe their pay-outs will remain stable and have not been as drastically impacted by currency fluctuations in the market. EMPLOYERS’ RESPONSIBILITY Sixty per cent of respondents feel that their employer has done a good job in implementing the necessary safety measures to protect them from contracting the virus in the workplace. Twenty-seven per cent of respondents indicated that they needed their employers to provide the necessary tools to work remotely, such as Internet connectivity, while 20% want their employer to demonstrate their duty of care by providing the necessary protective clothing and equipment to those who still need to work, such as protective gear and regular deep cleaning of the work environment. Twelve per cent want their income and job secured, while 11% mention the need to stay connected to co-workers and their managers to provide the necessary direction during this time. Respondents were also asked what employers could do to show care and build trust during this time. Close to 40% mentioned that they needed to stay connected during the lockdown period, making sure that everyone is clear about expectations and that all relevant new developments are shared continuously. However, not everybody feels this way – 6% said they want to be left alone to do their job. Another 35% mentioned that their employer needs to take care of the basics – by ensuring that they still have their job and income (19%) and that their health is taken care of by providing relevant protective equipment and necessities (16%). A further 12% want their managers to show clear direction and require more ‘human’ engagement by showing support in nonfinancial ways.