An employee at pharmaceutical manufacturer Adcock Ingram’s Critical Care manufacturing facility has tested positive for Covid-19, and 50 other employees underwent testing on April 23, and have self-quarantined based on the primary contact trace. The infected employee displayed minor symptoms of the virus on April 21, and reported to the on-site clinic. In accordance with protocol, the employee was referred to a private pathology laboratory for testing and was self-quarantined at home. The company received information on April 23 that the employee had tested positive for the virus. The employee remains in self-quarantine and will only return to work once cleared by a healthcare professional. Adcock is assessing the employee’s home environment and will move the employee to a separate quarantine location if necessary. The Critical Care facility has undertaken a comprehensive immediate response. The section of the factory in which the employee worked has been shut down; a track and trace in accordance with company protocols is under way; all primary contacts in the work environment have been tested in accordance with the protocols; and all employees in the section of the factory in which the employee worked, and other contacts, if any, have been or will be self-quarantined. Moreover, deliveries from Critical Care have been suspended, and only emergency deliveries are taking place. Also, all appropriate hygiene and disinfecting procedures are in place, will continue and have been escalated. Employees who are able to do so, provided Adcock is satisfied with the result of deep-clean procedures, will return to the site on April 28. “We are confident that our Covid-19 protocols are sufficient and based on best practices,” the company asserted. “The company places the safety and well-being of our workforce as our highest priority, and we continue to monitor the situation carefully to ensure that the infection is contained.  We assure the public and medical practitioners that products manufactured at, and distributed from, the Aeroton plant are safe for use. "There is no risk of products being contaminated with the coronavirus due to the long mandatory quarantine period products are subjected to while quality control procedures are conducted on manufactured batches,” said Critical Care MD Colin Sheen. Adcock Ingram operates three manufacturing sites in South Africa, namely, Wadeville, Clayville and Aeroton, and has an investment in a plant in Bangalore in India. The company operates a distribution network across South Africa to deliver product to all its customers. “As the manufacture and distribution of pharmaceutical products is highly regulated, Adcock Ingram has always placed great emphasis on health and safety, hygiene and access control across our entire value chain,” the company stressed. Since the declaration of a National State of Disaster by President Cyril Ramaphosa, the company has increased its access and hygiene protocols further, with temperature scanning and screening procedures for all staff and visitors, increased mandatory sanitisation, and use of personal protective equipment and physical distancing protocols. Each Adcock Ingram site (manufacturing and distribution) has a business continuity plan in place detailing all necessary plans and protocols that will be followed should any employee or contractor be suspected of having contracted Covid-19, or tested positive for the virus. The structure of the value chain also means that should a manufacturing facility be temporarily shut down; sufficient stock is available to continue supply to customers over this period. In the event of one of the company’s distribution centres being closed temporarily, critical stock can be sourced from other warehouses in the network. Adcock Ingram has a Covid-19 crisis response committee that oversees all of the initiatives mandated in managing Covid-19 and the related regulations and ensuring that the company responds in a well-considered, responsible and agile manner.