Statutory research agency, the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), has started with the second part of its public perception survey on the impact of the coronavirus on South Africans. This follows an initial survey conducted from March 27 to March 31 during which the organisation looked at what South Africans understand and know about the virus and how they are reacting to the Covid-19 emergency. The second phase is being conducted from April 7 to April 14 and will look specifically at the lockdown, which was implemented from March 27 to April 16 initially, and has since been extended by a further two weeks. The survey is conducted on the social media platform Moya Messaging which can be accessed data free. It will look at issues such as what type of community the respondent lives in; access to services for drinking water and sanitation; knowledge about the coronavirus including preventive measures, primary concerns about the virus, does a lockdown help to prevent the spread of the virus; and perceptions about personal risk in relation to contracting the virus. Moreover, it will examine travel, movement and adherence to social distancing guidelines; access to food during the lockdown; testing for Covid-19; the socioeconomic impact of the lockdown on the respondent and his/her household; whether the respondent was subjected to gender based violence during the lockdown; and activities undertaken by the respondent during the lockdown. The second part of the survey will include telephonic qualitative questions which will provide deeper responses from respondents, particularly those with minimal Internet access of out of coverage range. This is particularly important noting the digital divide in South Africa and the essential need to service communities most at risk, says the HSRC. Professor Priscilla Reddy, the lead researcher on the study, has called on all South Africans to share the link to the survey with as many people as possible. “Covid-19 has affected us all in the country, and the world, in ways which we could never have imagined. We need to understand what this pandemic has meant to you. The more widespread the responses we receive, the better the quality of our understanding and analysis. We may not be able to prevent another outbreak in future but if we understand the implications of this virus on the lives of ordinary South Africans we can prepare better for the future. The HSRC and South Africa needs your help,” Reddy emphasised. To participate in the study, respondents can click on the following link: https://hsrc.datafree.co/r/HSRCCOVID19.