The African National Congress (ANC) on Tuesday welcomed the donation of “much-needed” medical supplies and personal protective equipment (PPE) from the People’s Republic of China to help the South African government’s ongoing efforts to combat the Covid-19 outbreak in the country. “The ANC joins all patriotic and peace loving South Africans in welcoming the much-needed assistance from the  People’s Republic of China in our collective quest to control the spread of Coronavirus. "The personal protective equipment will come handy as South Africa intensifies its war against the Covid-19 pandemic,” ANC national spokesperson Pule Mabe said. He said the massive consignment which landed at the OR Tambo International Airport in Kempton Park, from China’s Guangzhou province will help protect South Africans who are at the frontline of the fight to save citizens’ lives. “Our solidarity with the people of China comes a long way and has endured many decades. We share a perspective of creating a world order where no one dies from preventable disease. "Through our own humane solidarity efforts, South Africa continues to collaborate with the People's Republic of China across different facets, including but not limited to, trade relations, educational exchange programmes and other social relieve interventions,” Mabe said. “We wish to thank the Chinese government under the leadership of the Communist Party of China most heartily. All these humanitarian acts are necessary to flatten the curve and save lives.” The Chinese Embassy in South Africa’s Charge d'Affaires Li Nan handed over the consignment which included 11 000 N95 masks, 50 000 surgical masks, 3 000 sets of protective suits, 500 portable infrared thermometers, 3 000 goggles, 11 000 pairs of surgical gloves and 11 000 pairs of medical shoe covers to South Africa’s Health Minister Zweli Mkhize and International Relations Minister Naledi Pandor. Mkhize announced on Tuesday that the total number of Covid-19 infections in South Africa has  increased to 2 415. The figure marks an increase of 143 on the tally given by Mkhize on Monday evening. South Africa has so far recorded 27 fatalities related to the virus.