President Cyril Ramaphosa has announced a five-level “risk-adjusted strategy” where the country will slowly ease lockdown restrictions starting 1 May.

From 1 May, there will be some activity allowed, subject to extreme caution. Some businesses will be allowed to resume under specific conditions.

He called on all South Africans to wear a face mask from that date.

Ramaphosa explained the five levels. Level five - which is where the country is now - is where drastic measures are used to contain the virus.

Level four will kick in from 1 May, and this means some activity will be allowed to resume, but with precautions.

Level three involves the easing of restrictions around work and social activities. Level two is further easing, but social distancing and discouraging gatherings will still be enforced. Level one means further easing, where more normal activity can resume.

Cabinet ministers will provide details on how industries are affected in each level in due course, Ramaphosa said, and industry will be able to make recommendations.

He said businesses must prepare for a phased reopening. Only a third of the workforce may work during level four. Staff who can work remotely should be encouraged to do so. Borders will remain closed, however, apart from repatriations. No travel will be allowed between provinces apart from goods and exceptional circumstances, like funerals.

Public transport will resume, but with stringent hygiene practices - and all passengers must wear face masks.

The public must only leave home for essentials, and exercise will be allowed under strict circumstances.

The elderly and those who are sick must remain at home.

Cigarettes will be allowed to be sold. Bars and shebeens will remain closed, as well as cinemas, concerts and theatres, conferences and social gatherings.

The only gatherings allowed will be for funerals and for work-related.

“The action we take now must be measured and incremental,” he told the nation on Thursday night, adding that the phased strategy was informed by scientists.

The president said the country needed to avoid a “rushed reopening” which would ultimately lead to yet another hard lockdown.

Ramaphosa was speaking exactly seven weeks since the first confirmed Covid-19 case in the country.

Ramaphosa said the country’s approach was based on social distancing, restricting movement and stringent hygiene practices, adding that there was “clear evidence” that these measures were working.

He said a lockdown, while effective, cannot continue indefinitely.

The president reiterated the complication about the virus, where many people who have it are totally unaware.

He said the coronavirus can “overwhelm the most advanced health systems within a matter of weeks”, which is why South Africa took drastic measures so far.

“I am reiterating these basic facts… because they explain the actions we’ve taken to date, and they inform the actions” he announced on Thursday night.

He reminded the public to cover themselves when coughing or sneezing, and to continue to practice good hygiene. He said government was working to ensure enough resources for healthcare workers. He said public healthcare response is being increased, and said community screenings were still on going.

Meanwhile, an additional 73 000 army members will assist in services such as providing water supply and with infrastructure.

“This is a time for patience,” the president said. “Yet we are all called upon to make a sacrifice for our future and the future of others.

“During the past five weeks we’ve demonstrated what a nation can achieve… we must not give up now. I am asking you to stay focused and remain united.”