The recent rains experienced have bolstered South Africa’s average dam levels to 67.3%. The latest dam levels report by the Department of Water and Sanitation (DWS) show that Gauteng’s dam levels increased from 98.8% last week to the current 101.2%. Gauteng boasts the highest levels in the country. The Bon Accord dam increased to 106.6%, followed by Rietvlei dam, which increased to 102.5%, and Bronkhorstspruit dam, which now stood at 102.2%. The Vaal dam remains unchanged at 61.5%. “The increase will have a positive impact on the government’s efforts to stem the tide against the spread of Covid-19,” said Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu in a statement released on April 9. The Northern Cape, which is still recovering from a severe drought spell, recorded an increase to an average dam level of 94.6%, while Mpumalanga and Limpopo recorded dam levels of 74.9% and 68% respectively. Further, Limpopo recovered from dam levels of below 50% four months ago to 68%. “Eastern Cape is also making steady progress towards recovery from a debilitating drought. KwaZulu-Natal and Free State have moved to the middle of the table following persistent showers in both provinces in the past week,” the DWS noted. While the Western Cape recorded average dam levels of 40.2% this week, it is expected that the winter rains will boost the water available from dams from May. Meanwhile Sisulu once again expressed concern over municipalities that continue to cut off water supply to their residents following her recent call to make water available to fight Covid-19. Despite a call last week for all the municipalities to make water available to their residents to enable them to wash hands regularly, the department still receives calls from citizens who complain about being cut off, she said. “Access to water has become key to fighting the scourge and, to this end, the department has embarked on a countrywide rollout to distribute jojo tanks among destitute communities.” However, while the distribution is successful, Sisulu noted, callers complain of local authorities who simply ignore their pleas to be given water tanks. “The defiant authorities have chosen a wrong time to punish residents who can not afford their bills, “ she concluded.