Health Minister Dr Zweli Mkhize says more tests need to be conducted in Nelson Mandela Bay, in the Eastern Cape, owing to a mismatch between the number of Covid-19 deaths and positive cases in the area. He said it was concerning that out of 167 people, 1 000 contacts were identified. “In my own reading of the numbers, I have a feeling that we need to do more testing; if we do so, we can discover the full extent of the Covid-19 infection because the number of deaths and the number of reported positive cases don’t match in this area,” Mkhize said. Nelson Mandela University has offered 800 beds for quarantining purposes. Contacts will be quarantined at the facility for 14 days and those needing specialist care will be moved to hospitals. Mkhize said government was aware that Nelson Mandela Bay faced limits with regards to protective equipment and staffing. “We have picked up through reports that there have been certain constraints in terms of the supply of protective equipment and staffing based on the historic shortages  . . . , as well as the challenge of space with regards to hospital beds,” he said and assured that government was trying to get stock out for distribution within a day or two. Mkhize said the national Department of Health will also deploy a deputy director-general to take the lead in the Nelson Mandela Bay district with immediate effect. “There has been an agreement between me and the Health MEC to deploy one of the deputy director-general from the head office to come and base here as of immediate effect. He will be providing leadership, so as to pull up a very strong, coherent response for the teams that are busy with the issue of tracking, screening and testing. The deployed DDG will have to come up with a coherent strategy on how to manage the virus outbreak district to district,” said Mkhize. Meanwhile, he said the issue of staff shortages was also being handled. He commended both the provincial Department of Health as well as the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure for refurbishing several wards to make room for patients admitted with Covid-19. “The Department of Infrastructure has indicated that in the next week most of the wards will be handed over to Nelson Mandela Bay and a few other areas where work is being done,” said Mkhize.