The International Air Transport Association (Iata) and the International Transport Workers’ Federation (ITF) have issued a joint appeal to the world’s governments to support the global aviation industry, to protect jobs and make certain that air services will continue. As a result of national lockdowns and travel restrictions to counter the Covid-19 pandemic, air passenger demand had collapsed by 80%, and airlines were confronted with a liquidity crisis, placing 25-million jobs (directly and indirectly reliant on aviation) at risk, worldwide. “Airlines are facing the most critical period in the history of commercial aviation,” highlighted Iata director-general and CEO Alexandre de Juniac. “Some governments have stepped in to help, and we thank them. But much, much more is needed. Direct financial support is essential to maintain jobs and ensure airlines can remain viable businesses.” “Iata and ITF have a shared goal to ensure a sustainable future for the aviation industry,” emphasised ITF general secretary Stephen Cotton. “In order to achieve this, we need urgent action now. It is crucial that governments understand the importance of the aviation industry in rebuilding the global economy and support the industry.” The two representative associations urged governments to take four main steps to help the sector. The first of these was that priority should be given to the protection of health workers treating those infected with Covid-19. They pointed out that aviation professionals were volunteering to provide frontline assistance to medical services in the effort to contain the disease. Two of the other steps they called on governments to take were to carefully coordinate with each other and with the sector to implement effective harmonised measures to ensure passenger and aircrew safety; and to immediately supply financial and regulatory support for airlines, to ensure that the terms and conditions of employment for air transport workers were maintained. The final step was to aid the sector to restart operations rapidly by adjusting regulations and ending travel restrictions in a way that was predictable and efficient. “Bold decisions are required to invest in the future of airlines and protect the jobs and livelihoods of the transport workers who will lead the economic recovery when Covid-19 has been contained,” asserted Cotton. “Workers and the industry have joined forces, we invite more governments to join us in a coordinated approach to keep the industry and its essential supply chains moving.” “[W]hen the world is ready to start travelling again, the global economy will need aviation at its best to help restore connectivity, tourism and global supply chains,” affirmed De Juniac. “That will require a harmonised approach with industry, workers and governments working together.”