Local system integrator NEC XON has appointed Viven Bhowani as COO to oversee the organisation’s transition as it increasingly digitises services, integrates solutions to exponentially multiply business outcomes and explores growth into broader markets. Bhowani was formerly the solutions director at iOCO, one of Africa’s largest system integrators under the information and communication technology (ICT) services multinational EOH. “Our vision is to pursue innovative technologies to safely and securely overcome some of society’s greatest challenges. [Bhowani] will help us achieve that goal by uniting and projecting our strengthened value proposition, from across our group’s solutions portfolio, into broader sub-Saharan, East and West African markets,” says NEC XON CEO Carel Coetzee. “NEC XON has always been customer-driven. The founders nurtured human assets with exceptionally strong technology expertise and a passion for innovation and we now want to harness their deep skills and enhance our efficiencies through digitalised operations to provide more business value to our clients. We also increasingly want to supplement our capabilities through the deep global skills and innovation available through our integration with NEC Group," says Bhowani. NEC XON serves the energy, telecommunications, enterprise, retail, financial, mining, pharmaceuticals, public and other sectors in South Africa and 16 other sub-Saharan African countries. It provides solutions for smart and renewable energy, safety and security – including cyber and digital physical security solutions, smart cities, telecommunications service providers and carrier-grade networking for enterprises. It also provides cloud, ICT infrastructure, data, analytics and information management solutions, and managed services. “Our solutions portfolio strategically positions us to augment organisations across Africa with an integrated value proposition,” says Coetzee. African organisations are a key future global growth market and they are hungry for the innovative technology solutions to address business challenges in uniquely African socioeconomic contexts.