Financial services group Old Mutual is making R4-billion worth of cover available to about 430 000 registered healthcare workers across South Africa, the group announced on April 8. Unlike traditional cover, the initiative offered to these professionals is neither a product nor a policy and no premiums will be recovered on it. Instead, the cover will be freely accessible to registered healthcare workers on the frontlines of the Covid-19 pandemic who are “selflessly working to ensure the wellbeing of impacted South Africans everywhere, every day”, Old Mutual highlights in a statement. The cover will be available to qualifying categories of members who are registered with the Healthcare Professionals Council of South Africa (HPCSA), as well as all registered practitioners of the South African Nursing Council (SANC). Effective from April 1 to December 31, 2020, the cover includes a R10 000 sum which becomes payable in the event of death of qualifying healthcare workers, and is intended to provide relief to families who may have to deal with the tragic loss of a loved one during this period. The cover has no exclusions, and will include death related to any cause. For more information on this initiative as well as how to access this cover, call 0860 888 995. Further information is also provided at www.oldmutual.co.za. Old Mutual interim CEO Iain Williamson says the business’s decision to support healthcare workers was inspired by a collective call supported by its 30 000-strong workforce. “We are acutely aware of the critical work being done by all essential services workers across the country as they continue to serve, care and protect our nation during this crisis.” While Old Mutual acknowledges that it cannot practically cover every single essential service worker at this time, he points out that the business has nevertheless made a call to provide the free cover to registered healthcare workers who Old Mutual believes are among the most exposed to the virus. “From our entire workforce to all our healthcare workers across the country, we say: ‘we are here for you!'” The group is also supporting national initiatives to access personal protective equipment for essential service workers such as face masks, gloves and hand sanitiser to the tune of R5-million. This announcement follows the group’s recent comprehensive Covid-19 relief response, which already includes a R50-million pledge towards relief efforts that address immediate educational needs, hygiene awareness and nutritional support. In addition, Old Mutual Insure has pledged R40-million towards small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and service provider support during this period. Further, the group has also included the Solidarity Fund as a beneficiary on its staff payroll giving programme in which employees, including senior leaders and the executive team are encouraged to give generously. Another form of assistance during the Covid-19 pandemic is the provision of secure space adjacent to Old Mutual’s Pinelands office in Cape Town, for a Covid-19 testing centre, in partnership with Lancet Laboratories. The group is also providing ongoing customer relief, premium payment holidays and interest-free loans to qualifying cash-strapped SME customers.