The head of the United Nations (UN) in South Africa Nardos Bekele-Thomas, supported by the heads of various UN agencies, has partnered with e-learning mobile service Funzi, to launch a mobile learning course – Covid 19:  Adapt and Thrive – as part of the country’s official coronavirus response initiative. This initiative was created in collaboration with Harambee Youth Employment Accelerator, supported by the Solidarity Fund and is rolled out as part of the national initiative to reach three-million young people during the lockdown. The course is accessible on the Funzi mobile website and is, therefore, available on a mobile service such as a cellular phone or tablet. Since 2015, Funzi has been delivering essential information and learning opportunities to people in crisis situations. It has the experience and research, and its activities have shown that mobile information technology is the most effective mechanism to reach the majority of the population to disseminate information. In addition, the service notes that access to relevant and factual information has a calming effect during times of uncertainty. “In times of crisis, mobile learning has proven to be incredibly impactful. We were able to launch the course in only ten days, giving millions access to timely and critical information,” says Funzi founder Aape Pohjavirta. The Funzi approach is unique because of its combination of technology and pedagogy. It is designed for mobile with users in emerging markets in mind. The course aims to give everyone the opportunity to improve their lives through learning with two sets of courses – the Funzi Now Pack and the Funzi Future Pack. The Funzi Now Pack provides clear information on the coronavirus, how it spreads, preventive measures and national restrictions. Initially, it includes the Covid-19: Adapt and Thrive course, which addresses the physical, mental, social and financial impact that the coronavirus has on people’s lives, their families, community and society. The course was created alongside South African experts at Harambee, in addition to specialists in the fields of medicine and digital product design. After learning how to adapt to, and deal with, the current situation, learners are directed to the Funzi Future Pack, which comprises four courses equipping them with skills to meaningfully develop themselves and help others to build a better future. “The UN in South Africa is encouraging local entities, civil society groups, community organisations and the private sector to join this campaign and encourage the people of this beautiful country to participate in this education campaign,” says Bekele-Thomas. She adds that the UN will accelerate the translation to local languages in collaboration with Funzi, Harambee and local authorities.