Three-dimensional (3D) printing technology is slowly cementing its role as a key part of the manufacturing mix, continuing its journey towards Industry 4.0, says data analytics company GlobalData. The company indicates that this technology has already lowered the barriers to entry for manufacturing, allowing enterprises across many industries to better respond to customer demands, while offering greater customisation of products and speed to market. “3D printing has leaped from the proof-of-concept stage to a viable manufacturing alternative, demonstrating its potential in real-world environments, notably in industries such as aerospace and defence, construction, consumer and automotive,” says GlobalData disruptive tech analyst Venkata Naveen. The Innovation Explorer database of GlobalData’s Disruptor Intelligence Centre reveals how 3D printing is increasingly becoming crucial in the mainstream manufacturing of various industries. 3D printing in the construction industry can be used to not only produce concrete bricks but to print an entire building, GlobalData points out. The technology is posited as more befitting to the industry as the design information required to print a product is readily available in the building information modelling (BIM) software. 3D printing allows faster and more accurate construction of complex shapes and, at the same time, cuts production times, and reduces labour costs and material waste, says the company. Apis Cor, a robotic construction startup in Boston, in the US, used its movable 3D printing machine to build the world's largest two-storey office in Dubai. The printer, shaped like a tower crane, sits in the middle of the building to print the office layer by layer using a gypsum-based material. Also, the market for 3D printing in healthcare is growing rapidly, particularly for the manufacturing of medical devices. One of the greatest advantages of the technology is highlighted as the freedom to produce custom-made and on-demand medical products and equipment. Moreover, the availability of open-source product designs is helping 3D printing startups mass-produce essential medical equipment. In the wake of the Covid-19 pandemic, for instance, 3D printing has come to the rescue of hospitals to help meet demand for key medical supplies such as protective face masks and ventilators. In early March, Italy’s 3D printing startup Isinnova produced an essential ventilator part, the ‘Venturi valve’, which connected an oxygen mask to a respirator, for a local hospital in northern Italy. Meanwhile, the company noted that the automotive sector is also ripe for 3D printing. Besides its extensive use for rapid prototyping, the technology is being used to produce parts such as tail lights, bumpers and parking brake brackets. The technology not only helps the aesthetic design of vehicles but also allows lower consumption of materials and wastage which is beneficial for all stages of manufacturing, the data centre indicates. Audi, for example, has used Stratasys’ multimaterial 3D printer to slash the lead time for prototyping of transparent, multi-coloured tail light covers.