Companies in Africa have recognised the value and importance of quality assurance processes for technology and software, as it underpins business growth, end-user satisfaction, cost control and security, says quality assurance and software testing company Africonology CEO Mandla Mbonambi. Any organisation seeking growth within a stagnant market needs to put quality assurance at the top of the strategic agenda, because it allows for increased agility and flexibility within the confines of digital transformation, as well as providing companies with a foundation from which to build more reliable solutions and services, while remaining competitive and compliant, he explains. "Quality assurance also supports an innovative future by allowing the organisation to fully leverage the potential of artificial intelligence, automation, machine learning and the Internet of Things. It is necessary to ensure that any company can fully realise its role in the Fourth Industrial Revolution, as quality assurance and testing are the frameworks that companies need to implement if they want results." Quality assurance cements a company's competitive advantage into the fabric of the organisation, and ensures the business can reconfigure the quality of its services and products, says Mbonambi. "The cost of quality assurance is quickly returned in smooth performance, improved productivity and better service. More customers, more capabilities and better services tend to translate into savings." Africa is paying attention to the value of quality assurance and is increasingly aware of its value to the business, he adds. "It also doesn’t need to be left behind in Africa due to skills shortages and infrastructure complexities," he emphasises. While Africa has its own challenges and faces complexities around skills retention and development, this does not mean that quality assurance and testing are not part of corporate culture. There are organisations that have developed rigorous testing and quality-assurance-as-a-service solutions.