On the occasion of Earth Day, the Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC) has launched a memorial award in honour of its late CEO Steve Sawyer. The REvolutionaries: The Steve Sawyer Memorial Award will honour Sawyer’s life mission to pioneer the global energy transition, recognising young leaders in the renewable energy sector in developing countries. Sawyer had a distinguished career in environmental and climate activism. During his tenure at Greenpeace International, he survived the bombing of the Rainbow Warrior ship while campaigning against nuclear testing in French Polynesia. He also contributed significantly to developing the wind industry in several countries, including India, China, Brazil and South Africa. Steve remained with the GWEC until his passing in July 2019. Reflecting Sawyer’s values, the award seeks to empower young people working on the frontiers of the renewable energy revolution in their respective countries. The yearly award will have a different regional focus for each programme cycle. This year, the programme will focus on clean energy leaders in Africa, with candidates either working in or targeting their work to one or several countries in Africa. The winner will receive a prize that seeks to empower the recipient to further their work in driving the clean energy revolution. The prize package includes a monetary prize, funded travel to attend a regional GWEC event, as well as opportunities to promote the recipient’s thought leadership to a global network. A jury will determine the winner of the award, focusing on five key criteria: leadership, renewable energy, innovation, scalability and diversity. The jury is composed of people close to Sawyer, including members of his family, the GWEC, REN21 and Greenpeace. Applications are now open for the award until June 7. “Steve was a pioneer in many areas, not least in recognising the critical importance of climate change and the big role wind energy was going to play in reducing global carbon dioxide emissions. "Throughout his life he showed incredible courage and commitment in his campaigning work and was a champion of young people – particularly women – who were willing to step up, get involved in the energy transition and become leaders. We hope this award will help a new generation of renewable energy champions to come forward and continue Steve’s work,” says GWEC CEO Ben Backwell. “Steve always had an eye for talent, and he particularly admired people who weren't afraid to shake up the status quo. And of course shaking up the prevailing fossil-fuelled energy system was at the top of his list for so many years. Nothing gave him more hope than seeing young people he'd mentored make their mark on the world. He would have been incredibly proud to see donations made in his name going to rising stars in renewables, and particularly those coming from developing countries that have so much potential to choose a more resilient energy future,” comments Kelly Rigg, Steve's wife of 35 years and director of the Varda Group environmental consultancy.