The International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and the Viet Nam Ministry of Information and Communications have postponed the ITU Digital World 2020 as Covid-19 continues to spread across the world. The global technology event for government, industry and small and medium-sized enterprises will now take place as ITU Digital World 2021 in September next year at the same Ha Noi, Viet Nam, venue where it was initially set to be hosted from September 6 to 9, 2020. “We believe this is the best and safest course of action to ensure the wellbeing and safety of all event participants and guarantee a successful event,” the ITU said in a statement on April 28. In 2019, the conference hosted more than 4 000 participants from 135 countries, with 260 exhibitors and 250 speakers. Despite the postponement, international events such as ITU Digital World 2021 remain “more important than ever” as a platform to bring together the global information and communications technology (ICT) community to learn, share knowledge, debate and network. “The world is facing an unprecedented threat from Covid-19 and ICT has become a key ally in combatting this threat and helping to prevent, detect and diagnose disease. It has taken on a new importance in connecting us for health, work, education, entertainment, news, public announcements and to our friends and families,” the ITU notes. For the first time, digital solutions and platforms are being used on a massive scale to help cope with and respond to a pandemic, with the government of Viet Nam and ITU calling upon global leaders, governments and the technology industry to ensure they are present and fully engaged to rise to the challenge and strengthen the multilateral, collective digital response to this crisis. This is critical as the Covid-19 crisis has also revealed the extent of the digital divide, with many families, workers, businesses and populations not able to access or afford the benefits of digital technology. “Action is urgently needed to ensure a fair access to ICTs, for the benefit of all. Now, more than ever, governments, industry, international organisations, nongovernmental organisations, academia and other stakeholders must work together to find mutually beneficial solutions.” International cooperation and collaborative action is required to adopt concrete, urgent measures to accelerate digital transformation across all sectors and to connect all global citizens to digital services, close the digital divide and build strong foundations for the future wellbeing of all.