Statutory research agency, the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), in partnership with the University of KwaZulu-Natal’s (UKZN's) Nelson R Mandela School of Medicine, is conducting a joint survey into how Covid-19 is impacting on health workers. Health workers are on the frontlines of the global fight against Covid-19. Across the world, with South Africa being no exception, health workers have also been infected by the virus. With this in mind, the HSRC and UKZN’s School of Medicine would like to understand how the virus is affecting South African health workers – both physically and emotionally. The survey is being conducted on an online platform and looks at several issues. It includes expanded professional designations – nurses, medical practitioners, medical students, support staff as well as allied healthcare workers; current role in the health care sector; if health care workers have received training on dealing with Covid-19; and the levels of knowledge, awareness and attitudes to Covid-19. It will also look at the use and access to personal protective equipment in the workplace; perceptions of risk in the workplace; concerns in relation to Covid-19; and health and psychosocial wellbeing of the respondent. Professor Priscilla Reddy, the lead researcher on the study, has asked all health workers to please share the link with colleagues so that government can ascertain a better picture of what is happening in the medical fraternity as it responds to Covid-19. "If we can understand this better, we can ensure the correct interventions to protect health workers physically and emotionally.” The survey is done on a data free platform for ease of answering. To participate in the study, respondents may click on the following link: www.hsrc.ac.za/heroes. The data from this survey will be used to advise government on how to capacitate health workers to ensure they are able to deliver quality health care services, particularly as South Africa prepares for a possible increase in Covid-19 diagnoses later in the year.