The Motsepe Foundation and associated organisations, Business for South Africa and the Solidarity Fund, have secured critical stock of 200 000 three-ply marks, 100 000 KN95 masks and sterile gloves and surgical masks for use by frontline doctors, nurses and healthcare workers. The stock is immediately available in South Africa and will be prioritised for use in the public healthcare sector across the country. This forms part of government and the business sector’s key objective to ensure there is a consistent, forward-looking supply of critical personal protective equipment (PPE) in South Africa to protect healthcare workers who are working tirelessly to ensure the public remains safe during this unprecedented global healthcare crisis. Health Minister Dr Zweli Mkhize was joined by the Deputy Health Minister Dr Joe Phaahla and Gauteng Health MEC  Dr Bandile Masuku at the Motsepe Foundation to ceremoniously receive the consignment that will be handed over to the Department of Health. “Ultimately, this is about our valued healthcare workers. Business and government have come together because we all share the concerns of unions and our workers that health workers must be protected as they fight coronavirus at the frontlines. No healthcare workers will be fielded without PPE and adequate training because we need our workers healthy and protected,” Mkhize said. Motsepe Foundation chairperson Dr Patrice Motsepe said: “The Motsepe family and companies that we are associated with, will continue to do everything possible to assist health workers, poor rural and urban communities and all South Africans to prevail over the current coronavirus pandemic.” Business for South Africa’s Health Workgroup’s key priority is to support government and the country’s healthcare workers by ensuring there is a consistent supply of critical PPE necessary to keep them safe during the pandemic. This includes global sourcing of PPE - of which significant orders have already been placed and which have already begun landing in South Africa; accelerating local production of critical equipment; and issuing an ongoing call to all companies and industries across South Africa who have access to PPE stocks, to urgently donate or divert them in the national interest. Business for South Africa’s Health Workgroup head Stavros Nicolaou commented that one of South Africa’s most critical objectives in turning the tide against the pandemic is to ensure the full availability and productivity of its health workforce.