The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) on Wednesday signed a trilateral agreement with two companies, 3Sixty Global Solutions Group (3Sixty GSG) and Tautomer, which is aimed at accelerating the commercialisation of technologies developed by the science council. (3Sixty GSG is a subsidiary of the Numsa Investment Company, and Tautomer is a partner company of 3Sixty GSG.) The agreement will permit the companies to investigate collaboration and investment opportunities at the CSIR. It will open the way to investments in research and development projects. It was signed by CSIR CEO Dr Thulani Dlamini, 3Sixty GSG CEO Khandani Msibi, and Tautomer MD Martin Magwaza. “Engagements with 3Sixty GSG have led to the identification of strategic investment opportunities with the CSIR,” reported Dlamini. “These engagements come at a time when the CSIR is at the pinnacle of rolling out its new strategy to focus on industrial development. The agreement also allows for the initiation and execution of specific technology development projects.” “Our Group will, as a result [of this agreement], be the proud owner of some of the cutting-edge technological products with global appeal,” enthused Msibi. “The products we have focused on will solve some of our country’s and ultimately global problems in a commercially sound way. We are starting a journey with the CSIR that will, once again, remind South Africa and the world about the technological leadership of this country, which, in many areas, remains unknown.” The agreement will allow his company to fast-track its pharmaceutical and scientific investment strategy. The alignment with the CSIR gives 3Sixty GSG the ability to invest in technologies being developed by the science council and which are close to commercialisation. This applies particularly to technologies in the areas of biopharming, bioplastics, energy, pharmaceuticals, traditional medicines and wireless mesh networks. The agreement is part of the CSIR’s new strategy, to cooperate with both the public and private sectors to develop and localise technologies. Dlamini affirmed that the partnership is important for the commercialisation of local technological developments. The CSIR is also in talks with other public and private sector entities regarding collaboration, in the various research sectors in which they would be interested. The aim, by increasing investment in local research and development, is to help local industry and society to address the challenges facing them. In turn, this will strengthen economic growth and create more jobs in the country.