President Cyril Ramaphosa in a statement on Monday expressed his condolences to the family of esteemed business leader Dr Richard Maponya, who passed away early on Monday morning, a few days after his ninety-ninth birthday. “We have lost a pioneer, a trailblazer and a man of extraordinary fortitude who paved the way for the racial transformation of the South African economy. “Dr Maponya’s life is a testament to resilience, determination and the power of vision: namely to see black business grow to assume its full role as the key participant and driver of our economy,” Ramaphosa said. Maponya’s business empire started in the retail sector in the 1950s with a milk distribution company, in Soweto. Maponya and his wife further expanded their empire to include interests in retail, automotive, filling stations and property developments. He was a founding member of the National African Federated Chamber of Commerce and chairperson of the African Chamber of Commerce. He actively sought to capacitate nascent black businesses and lent his support to entrepreneurship ventures, particularly in Soweto. In a separate statement, the University of Johannesburg (UJ) commented that Maponya’s selfless dedication to revitalising township entrepreneurs and entrepreneurship had resulted in many thriving youth startups in and around Soweto, and across the greater Johannesburg. In 2014, the UJ Centre for Entrepreneurship had partnered with Maponya to help entrepreneurs through a series of annual Think Tanks, the Dr Richard Maponya Lecture and the annual Dr Richard Maponya Soweto Conference. Through the partnership with UJ, Maponya had aimed to invest back into the Soweto business community and reignite the entrepreneurial fire in the upcoming generation. “Maponya distinguished himself as a successful businessman at a time when it was extremely difficult for black people to start a business, let alone excel in business. He had started from humble beginnings during the apartheid period and fought against apartheid legislation to establish and grow his businesses. “He had also played a sterling role in the community where he lived all his life. Maponya was a social entrepreneur well before the term was coined and ploughed back into his community as he became successful. He set an example for businesspeople and conducted his business ethically and morally,” said Business Unity South Africa. “Maponya was a first among equals. It is said that a thermometer measures the temperature, and a thermostat creates the temperature. Maponya was a thermostat who lit up the business scene for decades with his infectious personality, diligence and brilliance,” noted the South African Chamber of Commerce and Industry. Trade and Industry Minister Ebrahim Patel also expressed his condolences to Maponya's family, stating that he had received the first Lifetime Achievement Award at the inaugural South African Premier Business Awards in March 2013 hosted by the Department of Trade and Industry, Proudly South African and Brand South Africa. "Maponya was recognised for his contribution to the development of South African business and his contribution to the community during his lifetime. He leaves behind a legacy that needs to be treasured and built on for the success of black businesses," Patel said. Ramaphosa added that Maponya had left behind a towering legacy, and the President called on businesspersons to take up the baton and fulfill Maponya’s long-nurtured dream to open a youth entrepreneurship academy.