Freight logistics group Grindrod has started construction on a new, R105-million AutoPort, just off the N3 in Camperdown, KwaZulu-Natal. The 270 000 m2 property is located between Pinetown and Pietermaritzburg. The finished-vehicle logistics facility will offer reticulation for plug-in hybrid vehicles, metal roofing to mitigate fire and hail, a fully equipped workshop, fitment centre and a smart repairs facility. It will also allow for clearing and forwarding activities, bonded and duty paid storage, storage for trucks, light motor vehicles and other rubber-tyred vehicular equipment. Phase 1 of the development will accommodate the undercover storage of 2 400 vehicles and will be completed in the second quarter of this year. Phase 2 will kick off in the second half of 2020 and accommodate storage of a further 2 300 vehicles. Options to increase the capacity beyond the first two phases are in place and will be developed in line with market demand. These options may increase the capacity of the facility by a further 12 000 vehicles. Grindrod hopes to incorporate features such as solar panels, rainwater harvesting, wash-water recycling and plastic recycling systems into the facility. Plastic wrappings removed from vehicles will be transformed into bricks and plastic roof sheeting, and used in commercial applications. “This investment in key infrastructure supports our strategic focus of unlocking trade corridors,” says Grindrod CEO Andrew Waller. “Our management team has worked tirelessly and in collaboration with business partners to ensure that the design specifications provide our customers a unique competitive advantage and contribute to delivering a sustainable, cost effective and efficient hub for strategic growth along this corridor.” The Natcor rail link between Durban and Johannesburg runs adjacent to the property and provides for rail options both to and from the AutoPort. “Transnet Freight Rail is making good progress on the integration works,” says Grindrod in a statement.