Developed by automotive enthusiasts in response to Africa’s water crisis, demand for Premier Wash & Wax is growing monthly as more people become conscious of the need to conserve water and fall in love with the products’ results, says Premier Products owner Gerhard Veldsman. “Africa’s water crisis inspired us to find a product that could essentially save water. Living in a country that has a great love for cars and being a car fanatic myself, the vision was to develop a product that helped South Africans protect their beloved vehicles against the harsh African conditions while saving water in the process.” Launched on May 5, 2017, the development of the product started in 2014. In collaboration with members of the aerosol industry, Veldsman worked hand in hand with chemicals engineers to develop Premier wax. “It took months of trial and error, testing over 20 different product samples on various surfaces before the desired results were achieved.” Veldsman explains that Premier Wash & Wax is one of the only 100% waterless car cleaning products available on the market and effectively protects vehicles from the sun’s ultraviolet rays. Premier Wash & Wax wipes away dirt, tar, bugs and can restore a vehicle’s shine, and is used by car collectors, super cars owners, vintage car collectors, motorbike riders and airplane and boat owners alike. The product is also suitable for multiple use on multiple nonporous surfaces. While marketed directly to the public by internal sales representatives based across South Africa, Premier Products has secured orders from car dealers, car cleaning companies as well as car collectors. The product can also be bought through the company’s website. Currently only available in South Africa, Premier Products is looking to export Premier Wash & Wax in the near future, owing to “a huge demand from countries in the Southern African Development Community”. Produced using locally sourced ingredients and packaging, the product is manufactured at a chemicals factory in Midrand, Gauteng. The production process adheres to ISO procedures regarding procurement, manufacturing, packaging and environmental parameters. Eighteen people are involved in the manufacturing process, while there is capacity to produce about 5 000 cans of 500 ml each a month. “Batches are thoroughly tested by the factory after production and a retainer sample is kept of each batch distributed. Additionally, our sales process entails daily demonstrations of the product, which helps us keep a close eye on the quality,” explains Veldsman. To increase sales, Premier Products intends to open ten new offices in all nine provinces, which will require the company to ramp up production. In line with its expansion strategy, Veldsman also highlights Premier Products’ in-house management programme through which its staff are empowered to own their own franchise. Since May 2017, one staff member has become a franchise owner. “We are expanding and thrive on creating new jobs and opportunities for all South Africans. We strive for sustainability of both our environment and our people.” This article was first published by Creamer Media's Product Portal. To advertise on the Product Portal please email advertising@creamermedia.co.za and to subscribe to receive the Product Portal's weekly email newsletter please email subscriptions@creamermedia.co.za.