The British Government announced on Tuesday that Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei will be allowed to participate in the creation of the UK’s fifth-generation (5G) broadband telecommunications network. This despite strong lobbying from the US Government to exclude Huawei. However, for national security reasons, Huawei has been designated by the British as a “high risk” vendor. This means it will be excluded from what the British Government describes as sensitive, “core”, parts of the network. Consequently, Huawei will be excluded from all safety-related and safety-critical Critical National Infrastructure networks, from all critical security networks, and from sensitive locations, such as nuclear sites and military bases. It will also not be allowed a more than 35% share in the “access network”, which links mobile phone masts and devices and equipment. “We want world-class connectivity as soon as possible but this must not be at the expense of our national security,” stated UK Digital Secretary Baroness Morgan. “High risk vendors never have been and never will be in our most sensitive networks.” Huawei has been participating in UK telecommunications networks for 15 years now. Reportedly, Britain has so far not had any cybersecurity problems with Huawei. “The Government has reviewed the supply chain for telecoms networks and concluded today it is necessary to have tight restrictions on the presence of high risk vendors,” she explained. “This is a UK-specific solutions for UK-specific reasons and the decision deals with the challenges we face right now. It not only paves the way for secure and resilient networks, with our sovereignty over data protected, but it also builds on our strategy to develop a diversity of suppliers.” Had the UK banned Huawei form its planned 5G network, it would have been left with just two other options – Ericsson and Nokia. This would have undermined competition in the sector. Despite the restrictions placed upon his company, Huawei Vice-President Victor Zhang has welcomed the decision. “Huawei is reassured by the UK Government’s confirmation that we can continue working with our customers to keep the 5G roll-out on track,” he said in a statement. “This evidence-based decision will result in a more advanced, more secure and more cost-effective telecoms infrastructure that is fit for the future. It gives the UK access to world-leading technology and ensures a competitive market. … We agree a diverse vendor market and fair competition are essential for network reliability and innovation, as well as ensuring consumers have access to the best possible technology.” The British Government’s decision has been both welcomed and criticised, at home and abroad.