The Decongestion Task Team at the Port of Durban have achieved notable milestones and improvements in port efficiencies and processes since its inception, the Transnet National Ports Authority noted in a statement published on December 2. The team is headed by Port of Durban GM Moshe Motlohi. “As I look back at the enormous work that has been done by fellow colleagues and stakeholders, I bear testament to the power of collaboration and I am proud to have been part of this journey. It is not the end as yet and there is still a lot of work to be done to take the Port of Durban back to being the busiest port on the continent. "It has been encouraging to see improvements in key measures of efficiency, including ship waiting time, ship turnaround time, reduced truck turnaround time and staging times, improved fluidity on Bayhead road leading into the container terminals and improved rail turnaround time. "But we must not rest on our laurels and will continue collaborating with all role-players to sustain these improvements,” he said. As part of the measures implemented in recent months, Transnet Port Terminals was tasked with reintroducing a mandatory truck appointment system, in accordance with global best practice in the containers sector globally. At the Durban Container terminals, the project has since been closed out and fully handed over to the operations departments of the two terminals. The Point terminals has also implemented the system and it has reached its mature stage. To control and standardise the level of conduct within the port, the team ensured that a comprehensive transporters induction programme was developed by the Transnet Maritime School of Excellence in consultation with industry. The programme has since been rolled out. Terminal efficiencies remain a priority for the task team, with various improvement initiatives put in place over the past year. The task team also focused on increasing rail use. Megaprojects are still a priority for the team, as it looks to the future and responds to markets demands though improved infrastructure, rail and port capacity, and improving road traffic compliance to prevent intersection gridlock.