A flagship renewable energy project, commissioned by Amazon and to be rolled out by SOLA Group, is set to demonstrate the flexibility and convenience of procuring independent power through the electricity grid. The project will see 28 GWh of solar energy wheeled via State-owned power utility Eskom’s grid from a solar farm in the Northern Cape to Amazon’s facilities each year. Energy wheeling holds] value in that it enables the supply of energy to urban areas, which has been generated from energy projects in outlying areas, such as a solar farm located in an area where the sun is most powerful and consistent. This is done through the transfer of electrical power using a utility’s transmission or distribution system between different grid or network service areas. SOLA Group executive director Chris Haw explains that, although the concept of wheeling energy using Eskom’s existing infrastructure has been in place since 2008, certain administrative barriers have hindered the uptake of such services. “This project, which comprises a 10 MW solar photovoltaic (PV) farm, has also received a sought-after generation licence from National Energy Regulator of South Africa (Nersa), a milestone that other similar projects have struggled to achieve.” The SOLA Group, a vertically integrated renewable energy company, will be responsible for developing the project and will build, own and operate the solar facility. Haw says the Nersa process requires a signed power purchase agreement (PPA) and fully developed project in order to obtain approval. “This creates contractual challenges because many inputs, such as the foreign exchange rate, are still fluctuating while the application process is under way. The high standard of development required for submission means that Nersa is not handing out licences to projects that won’t proceed, which is a very good thing,” he notes. The project aligns with the South African government’s intent to open up the electricity grid, allowing independent generators of electricity and consumers to enter into bilateral agreements to optimise the cost and sustainability of energy, which has previously been difficult to achieve. The generation licence received from Nersa is one of the first granted as part of the recent allocation made for distributed electricity generation in order to plug the short-term capacity gap. SOLA will deliver the energy via the transmission network though a wheeling use-of-system agreement, the first of its kind. The project will be majority black South African-owned, demonstrating a pivotal dedication to transformation in South Africa’s energy sector. Black women-owned and operated energy and infrastructure investment holding company Mahlako a Phahla Investments will own 45% of the project. Mahlako’s executive team has led the company’s participation in South Africa’s renewable energy sector, and the company has been at the forefront of various infrastructure and energy sector projects in South Africa, having advised and invested in several energy projects across various technologies. Mahlako’s vision is to see more projects, with similar participation from underrepresented population groups, brought to fruition in South Africa going forward. Other investors into the project include African Infrastructure Investment Managers, through the Ideas Fund, one of South Africa's largest domestic infrastructure equity funds and one of the largest investors in the country’s renewable energy landscape, with a total of R10-billion invested into projects producing 2.5 GW of power. The project’s success could mean that more companies like Amazon will look to procure cleaner independent power through the grid. “This project is the tip of the iceberg in terms of what the electricity picture in South Africa could look like,” says Haw. Construction will begin in early 2021.