After a turbulent 2020, the construction sector is eager to make 2021 a much more prosperous year, says Master Builders and Allied Trades Association Western Cape (MBAWC) executive director Allen Bodill. He says the negative effects of the Covid-19 pandemic and subsequent hard national lockdown cannot be overstated when it comes to the construction industry. The economic shock brought on by the two-month work suspension has “caused great hardship for all operating in and around the sector”. “But, the recent Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan and supplementary Medium-Term Budget Policy Statement expanded on government’s medium- to long-term plans for the economy, and these timely strategic and policy statements have helped to address some of the uncertainty in the market,” notes Bodill. “Government’s prioritisation of our industry, given the labour-intensive nature of the construction industry and its ability to reinvigorate the economy, is further reassurance this year-end. “We note and welcome the government’s renewed commitment to regulatory reforms and its efforts to ease and reduce the cost of doing business. “As MBAWC we believe that there are exciting opportunities to be unlocked through more public-private partnerships (PPPs),” adds Bodill. “Such PPPs will initially have positive financial short and long-term spinoffs at the local level and will ultimately flow through to the national macroeconomy. “In 2021, we are committed to exploring further business opportunities of this nature.” Builders’ Holiday 
This December will be unlike any in recent memory for the industry, as contractors try and make up for the lost time during the period of lockdown, says Bodill. “Conventionally in South Africa, the building industry has closed for business from mid-December and reopened in early January, as part of the builders’ holiday. “This year, the Rapid Response Task Team has recommended that the builders’ holiday extend for only five business days, from December 24 until January 5. “The shortened break is intended to ensure that people can earn a livelihood.” That said, the annual shutdown in the Western Cape region is governed by the Building Industries Bargaining Council (BIBC). The council has confirmed the yearly shutdown in the Cape Peninsula, as starting on Friday afternoon December 11 and ending on Monday morning January 11. The council has, however, provided for an exemption process to be followed by those local employers who wish to work later than December 11 and start up before January 11. Bodill says a number of local contractors have already applied for permission to be exempted from the stated shutdown, following consultations with their respective workforce and any trade unions which may be represented among their workers. The BIBC has granted all of the exemption applications received to date.