Higher Education, Science and Innovation Minister Dr Blade Nzimande reported on Wednesday that a space infrastructure hub was going to be set up in the country. He was marking the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the South African National Space Agency (Sansa). Launched by the then Department of Science and Technology (now the Department of Science and Innovation) on December 9, 2010, the creation of Sansa allowed the country to align and coordinate better several space-related programmes that were then operating under different agencies. “I am … excited to share that Sansa was recently awarded funding towards the establishment of a Space Infrastructure Hub,” he highlighted. “This is because of the South African government’s plan to boost economic growth through infrastructure development.” The Minister affirmed that Sansa would significantly contribute to national economic development and job creation. Such contributions would include satellite development and testing, the creation of Big Data platforms, a satellite navigation augmentation system for Southern Africa, and the associated and necessary human capital development. “As a technological advancing country, South Africa is reliant on space-based applications and services and therefore the establishment of Sansa was strategically important in addressing our local challenges and improving the lives of our citizens,” he pointed out. “I am heartened to witness the incredible contribution by Sansa to our people and the global space industry through knowledge generation, service support excellence to our space partners around the world and contribution to the local industry and our economy despite the budget constraints the agency had to endure for a period of years. This agency has consistently produced clean audits since its establishment and [that] is a sign of effective management and governance.” The major pre-existing space entities which were combined to form Sansa were the then Satellite Applications Centre, which was part of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research, and the then Hermanus Magnetic Observatory, which fell under the National Research Foundation. Today, Sansa has four strategic programmes, created by a realignment of the expertise derived from its precursor bodies. These programmes are Earth Observation, Space Engineering, Space Operations and Space Science. Space is a global activity and industry, and Sansa has many international partners, both space agencies and space companies. These relationships have brought many opportunities to South African researchers and space enterprises. Africa and African space agencies are a particular priority for Sansa, with the aim of developing African solutions to African problems. Domestically, a priority has been the transformation of the space sector. This has been pursued by means of skills development and public outreach, supported by the Ministry of Science and Innovation. “Specific activities target women in science and previously disadvantaged youth whilst also using space to inspire future generations of space scientists and entrepreneurs across the country through public engagement,” he cited. “Thousands of learners have, through the years, engaged with Sansa experts at science and career festivals, school visits, science centres and now, even online. Our [space] science centre in Hermanus also hosts educator workshops to support the educators in the teaching of physics at schools.”