Solidarity Fund CEO Tandi Nzimande said the speedy roll-out of the Covid-19 vaccine was vital to end the devastation that the virus was causing, adding that the Solidarity Fund would ensure that the country received its equitable share of the vaccine when it became available. On Thursday, the Fund released its Impact Report, where Nzimande expressed the Fund’s pride in being able to support government’s efforts to accelerate the roll-out of vaccines in South Africa with a donation of R327-million to secure the country’s position in the COVAX programme, a global initiative aimed at working with vaccine manufacturers to provide countries worldwide equitable access to safe and effective vaccines, once they are licensed and approved. She stated that this particular donation was earmarked for the upfront payment required from South Africa to join the COVAX programme and represented 15% of the total cost for access to vaccines for 10% of the population, an estimated 6-million people. This comes as Health Minister Zweli Mkhize announced that South Africa was experiencing a second wave of the pandemic, saying the number of infections had significantly increased around the country. As part of its Health Response, the Fund will supplement testing capacity for the second wave and may choose to assist the Department of Health in procurement, distribution or awareness if a possible vaccine becomes available next year. “We all share the world’s excitement and hope now that the first vaccines are starting to be trialled around the world; as we all know, an effective vaccine is the cornerstone in the global fight against Covid-19 and essential if we are to learn how to live with the virus in the long term,” Nzimande said. The Solidarity Fund will provide ongoing communication, awareness and behavioural 'nudges' to reduce the rate of transmission, especially within Alert Level 1 and with the festive season approaching. Inclusive Support Solidarity Fund chair Gloria Serobe explained that R3.11-billion in financial contributions had been received from over 304 431 South African and international donors, including 14 487 individuals and 2 523 corporates (as at the end of September 2020). She added that an overwhelming amount of support in the form of in-kind donations and human resources was also received. “An example of an in-kind donation we received was when Transnet converted their two Phelophepa community health trains into testing trains. This helped improve testing capacity in remote and far-flung towns accessible via existing railway lines. This kind of support was priceless. Given that the Fund had no track record to speak of, gestures of this kind showed the willingness of people in our country to pull together in a time of need,” Serobe said. She said despite challenges, the Fund managed to provide inclusive support to those in need. Nzimande stated that the fund was given a clear mandate to use the donations wisely, effectively and responsibly to help fight the pandemic.