Property group Growthpoint Properties says it announces "with great sadness" the sudden passing of its chief development and investment officer Rudolf Pienaar. “Growthpoint is indebted to Rudolf for his passion, drive, dedication, and leadership, especially in the field of green building and environmental sustainability. His passing will certainly leave a void within the larger South African property community – in which he played a significant role. Rudolf will be greatly missed and our thoughts are with his family at this very difficult time,” says Growthpoint CEO Norbert Sasse. “Rudolf approached everything with energy and was known for his humour, warmth, generosity and fierce loyalty to his team. With his immense contribution to Growthpoint and green building in South Africa and globally, it can be truly said that Rudolf made our world a better place. He will be sadly missed both inside and outside of the boardroom,” adds Growthpoint South Africa CEO Estienne de Klerk. Pienaar's career in the commercial property industry spanned 35 years, of which 20 were with the Growthpoint portfolio. He first became involved with Growthpoint’s properties in 2000 and served in a succession of senior and executive roles at the company before he was appointed chief development and investment officer in August 2018. Over his esteemed career, he held directorship positions at Barprop and Primegro as well as Acucap Properties, Sycom Property Fund Managers and Growthpoint. He served on both Growthpoint’s Group and South African executive committees, and the Property Committee of the Victoria & Alfred Waterfront. He is the past chairperson of the Green Building Council of South Africa, past deputy chairperson and director of the World Green Building Council and served on the advisory board of the Department of Construction Economics at the University of Pretoria. As a pioneer of South Africa’s movement for a sustainable built environment, Pienaar championed many of Growthpoint’s green building achievements. He was a driving force behind Growthpoint’s energy-efficient and environmentally innovative ethos, which built Africa’s biggest portfolio of certified green buildings and supported the first-ever company issue of a Green Bond on the JSE. Earlier this year, a proud milestone for Pienaar and the business was receiving Africa’s first WELL certification for advancing health and wellbeing in buildings, for Growthpoint’s development of Exxaro’s new headquarters in Pretoria. Growthpoint received numerous awards and honours for achievements under Pienaar's leadership, including for development excellence, green building innovation, and the outstanding financial performance of its assets.