The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) and emerging black-owned small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMMEs) funding, training and support nonprofit organisation Black Umbrellas (BU) will identify companies for which new or existing technologies may be produced or manufactured to meet the supply chain requirements of black-owned SMME businesses in South Africa. The CSIR and BU will provide technical and technological support to these companies and also identify other organisations or government departments that may be interested in providing funding for any joint initiatives arising from the agreement. This supports the objectives of the CSIR strategy, which is aimed at collaborating with the public and private sectors to develop and localise technologies to advance industrial development in South Africa. The strategy is built around the vision of accelerating socioeconomic prosperity in South Africa through leading innovation, says CSIR CEO Dr Thulani Dlamini. “This year marks 75 years of the CSIR’s existence and we are proud to join hands with BU in one of the key government objectives, which is to support small businesses in a bid to revive the South African economy and create jobs. This partnership with BU is a gateway to ensuring that we respond to our mandate of making a lasting impact on various lives through innovation, research and development and, consequently, using sustainable methods to boost South Africa’s economy,” he says. “Under this partnership, the CSIR and BU will be able to identify possible programme focus areas which incorporate technology, supply chain, offtake agreements and funding opportunities,” he adds. “Our vision is to be a valued partner in enabling equal and sustainable economic access and participation. We do this by inspiring, developing, mobilising and connecting entrepreneurial and innovative people, solutions and resources to effect positive economic and social change,” says BU CEO Mark Frankel. "The CSIR is a key enabler in unlocking South Africa’s future economic growth, particularly in terms of the new economy. We are very grateful for the opportunity to partner with the CSIR and look forward to a long and meaningful relationship in scaling and accelerating South Africa’s small business ecosystem,” he notes.