The Lesotho Highlands Development Authority (LHDA) has shortlisted a total of 12 applicants to potentially tender for the main works of Phase II of the Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP). The project sent out calls for contractors to participate in the prequalification bids for the construction of the Polihali transfer tunnel and the Polihali dam and appurtenant works, the construction works of which are expected to start later this year. “We have achieved our objective, which was for the prequalification to yield a shortlist of suitably qualified applicants for the dam and tunnel construction,” said LHDA CE Tente Tente. Eight contractors participated in the prequalification for the construction of Polihali dam and appurtenant works contract, with six shortlisted, while 12 applicants applied to prequalify for the contract to construct the Polihali transfer tunnel, of which six were shortlisted. The procurement policy precludes the awarding of both the main works contracts to the same contractor. “The LHDA is confident that the shortlisted contractors have the capability, experience and resources to deliver the projects within the timeframe and to the required quality,” Tente said in a statement. The international participants include dam and tunnel experts with global experience on large-scale water infrastructure projects. Each bidding consortium comprises Lesotho and South African companies, as well as international contractors. This marks the start of the final design and construction phase of Phase II. Following the successful prequalification, the tender process is expected to be launched during the first quarter of 2020 – a major milestone in the water transfer component of Phase II, Tente added. To date, eight of more than ten advanced infrastructure construction contracts have been awarded. The remainder of the contracts are at varying stages of procurement. According to the current master programme, water delivery is scheduled for 2026. Phase II will increase the current water supply rate of 780-million cubic metres a year incrementally to more than 1 270-million cubic metres a year.