JSE-listed Balwin Properties on Thursday announced Munyaka, a R9-billion development in Waterfall, Midrand, which will include the largest freshwater lagoon in the southern hemisphere. Construction has started on the lagoon, which will cover an area the size of about seven rugby fields, along with the development’s boundary wall, gatehouse, lifestyle centre and show apartment block. The development will be completed over the next eight years. Balwin is further investing considerably in road infrastructure around Munyaka, having already completed Mia drive at a cost in excess of R100-million. The bulk of the 5 020 apartments will comprise Balwin’s core model one-, two- and three-bedroom apartments and will include appliances such as a fridge, stove, washing machine, tumble dryer and dishwasher in the sales price. In addition, Balwin will develop two ultra-luxurious penthouses with a 180° view of the lagoon, as well as four other super luxurious lagoon-facing units. Balwin recently concluded an exclusivity agreement with multinational company Crystal Lagoons for South Africa, which will see the company develop freshwater lagoons in six strategic nodes in Johannesburg, Pretoria, the Dolphin Coast, the Western Cape and Mbombela. Crystal Lagoons has developed a concept and technology, patented in 190 countries, allowing for the construction and maintenance of unlimited size bodies of water at low cost. The lagoon at Munyaka will feature a landmark 50-m-high tower with amenities including a 50-seater restaurant and conference facility with a view of the Johannesburg skyline, as well as zip-lining from the tower into the lagoon and a heated pool, fed by the lagoon. A range of nonmotorised watersport activities will be available through the lifestyle centre. All residents at Munyaka will have access to the lagoon, as well as a 6-Star green rated VIP lifestyle centre with an on-site gym, a spa, movie theatre, meeting rooms, restaurants, laundromats and concierge facilities. Access to these facilities will be biometrically controlled to add to the safety and security of residents. Free WiFi will be made available at the lifestyle centre, as well as around the beachfront area, where pergolas will offer cellphone charging facilities. “Munyaka, which translates to crystal in Venda, is set to be the crown jewel in our development portfolio. We have worked very closely with our architects to bring something exceptional to South African sectional title buyers and believe that it will not only set a new standard for lifestyle estate living in Waterfall, but indeed in the country,” commented Balwin CEO and founder Steve Brookes. “I’m a strong believer in the prospects of our country. We can and will turn South Africa Incorporated around. I’m so confident in the success of Munyaka and South Africa, that I have pledged to buy one of the penthouses for my family,” he added.