In collaboration with business management consultant Raizcorp, real estate investment trust Octodec has launched its enterprise and supplier development (ESD) programme, which takes global learnings and makes it relevant for local entrepreneurs to thrive in the world of business. The ESD programme aims to enhance the impact, sustainability and profitability of the selected participants, which will receive internationally accredited entrepreneurial learning, individual business guidance, access to infrastructure specialists and back-office support. Touching on the rationale of why the ESD programme was put together, Octodec MD Jeffrey Wapnick on Thursday said that Octodec “is passionately committed to enhancing and developing [its] existing suppliers to improve their long-term sustainability and profitability”. The company’s goal – through the programme – is to make these small and medium-sized businesses “scalable and more commercially viable” so that they have the potential to also become suppliers to other large companies. According to Raizcorp prosperator manager Sharon Venn, there are different programmes within the ESD programme, which can range anywhere from six months to three years, depending on the entrepreneur’s needs. To become a part of the programme, one has to apply online and submit a business profile, from where applicants are informed within a week whether the application has been successful or not. If the application has been approved, Raizcorp and Octodec then embark on a stringent selection process, which takes place across several different stages and interview processes. During the launch of the ESD programme, in Sandton, the first eight entrepreneurial beneficiaries were introduced. Participating in the pre-incubation enterprise development programme is Akash Gopie, from printing business CY Trading; Tumela Nyepele, from construction and building company Blue Pepper Developments; and Lucia Maluleka, from Luckat Projects, who also operates within the construction and building industry. Construction and building maintenance company Isipetho Ndaba Investments’ Arthur Matlala; alongside cleaning services provider Serviply’s Celethe Lingham; building and construction company Apogee Management Projects’ Hillary Molotsi; and Masmur Management’s Mokothuhla Makhari, also a construction and building company, are currently participating in the enterprise development programme. The supplier development programme, meanwhile, has building and construction company Dikwena M Trading’s Johannes Mokwena and engineering company NED Consortium’s Mangalani Neduvhuledza’s currently participating. Venn confirmed that there were plans to expand the programme in the future, noting that this was “the start of a long journey”.