Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (PRASA) administrator Bongisizwe Mpondo has appointed a panel of technical advisors to assist him during his 12-month tenure. The rail entity says the technical advisory team will provide PRASA with much-needed technical expertise, while also supporting Mpondo as he executes this turnaround strategy. The members of the team are: Dr Mathetha Mokonyama
Mokonyama has been seconded from the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research. He will focus on optimising PRASA service offering. Mokonyama holds a degree in civil engineering from the University of the Witwatersrand (Wits), as well as a Masters and PhD in transportation engineering from the University of Pretoria. Krishna Govender
Govender is a chartered accountant and will provide thought leadership in accounting and financial management at PRASA. 
Govender holds a BCom Honours degree in accounting from the University of Natal. Govender’s task is to strengthen revenue flow at the organisation. PRASA says he is an expert in finance and economics with more than 23 years’ experience in accounting and financial management in the public and private sector. Themba Camane  
Camane is no stranger at PRASA and has more than 25 years of experience in the fields of engineering, construction, real estate, and project management. His task is to turn around PRASA’s rail and Autopax bus operations. He holds a BSc Engineering (Civil) from Wits and a Masters degree from Wits Business School. William Mathebula
Mathebula has been seconded from National Treasury. His task is to provide expert knowledge and skills in supply-chain management. Phelisa Nkomo
Nkomo has been appointed on a fixed-term contract to improve communication, stakeholder management, as well as performance monitoring and reporting at PRASA. She holds an honours degree in economics from the University of Western Cape, as well as a postgraduate diploma in economics. Makhosini Mgitywa
Mgitywa has been appointed on a fixed-term contract as the PRASA spokesperson. He has 25 years’ experience in media, communication and public relations. Prior to joining PRASA he was head of communication and spokesperson at the Ministry of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation. He has also been head of communication and public relations at the Department of Public Enterprises and the Absa Group. “These appointments are a clear demonstration that government is committed to bring stability at PRASA,” says Mpondo. “I would like to thank members of the technical advisory team for accepting the invitation to serve the people of South Africa and, more importantly, to serve our most important stakeholder, the commuters.”