To improve service delivery to its stakeholders, the South African Council for the Project and Construction Management Professions (SACPCMP) is updating its registration and application systems. The update is in response to challenges that the council’s stakeholders have faced in recent years in their registration and application processes. It is expected that the update will result in both improved governance, as well as a more user-friendly interface for applicants and registered persons. “We have noted the frustration some people have experienced in the application process and have thus decided to take a bold step in updating our system. As with any measures toward improvement, there will be changes, delays and some challenges. “We are doing all we can to ensure that the update takes place as swiftly as possible,” says SACPCMP registrar Butcher Matutle. The initial phase of the update is expected to take about six to ten weeks to complete. Matutle has asked stakeholders to be aware that the update may affect activities such as tender or job applications, where evidence of registration is required. “The SACPCMP regrets any inconvenience that stakeholders could face for a short period of time as a result of the update and will communicate to its registered persons, applicants, as well as construction industry employers and stakeholders regarding the timelines pertaining to the update and its completion,” the organisation says. “We appeal to all for their patience and understanding during this system update. Over the next two weeks, we will provide specific timelines pertaining to how this update will affect each category of stakeholder – for example, among others, those who are already registered, and those awaiting examination dates,” says Matutle. Detailed communication regarding the update will be posted on the SACPCMP’s Web and social media platforms over the next few weeks. Moreover, stakeholders will receive direct communication regarding the update and its timeline.