When Frenchman Mathieu Serradori won the T1.3 class (petrol two-wheel drive) in the 7 500-km, 2020 Dakar Rally, while also clinching eighth place overall, he did so in a car manufactured by Johannesburg-based Century Racing (CR). Serradori also won stage eight of the Dakar. His car, the CR6, was built in Fourways under the leadership of CR chief engineer Julian Hardy. Hardy is originally from Mauritius, but has been a resident of South Africa since arriving in Cape Town in the 1990s, following his studies in aircraft engineering in France. Serradori acquired the vehicle from CR for use as a privateer in the Dakar, which means he did not participate on behalf of a specific vehicle manufacturer. This also means that he did not have access to the vast resources often on tap at manufacturer teams. CR did, however, provide support to Serradori during this year’s Dakar race. The rear-wheel-drive CR6 makes use of a stock seven-litre Corvette engine and a gear box imported from France. While a number of other parts are also imported, around 60% of the car (by volume) is manufactured in South Africa, says Hardy. CR has a carbon-fibre construction department that specialises in the building of the carbon body, as well as a number of carbon fibre parts. “The rear suspension of our car is pretty unique,” says Hardy. “And our traction and handling is very good. All of this leads to a different car architecture, with a lower centre of gravity and better mass distribution.” Hardy says CR conducts extensive research and development, with every race providing the opportunity to improve the CR6’s quality and durability. It is not all about speed, but also about not breaking down when crossing extremely harsh terrain at speed, he notes. The CR6, as the name indicates, is the latest iteration of what started as the CR1 in 2007. This vehicle was built for Mark Corbett. Apart from being a keen racer, Corbett is also the CEO of Century Property Development. CR is then also a spin-off from Corbett’s Century Property Development Racing. The first CR car to run in the Dakar was the CR4, in which Corbett finished 22nd overall in 2012. CR employs 18 people. The Future
CR builds not only CR6s, but also CR-T race vehicles, although this model is being phased out slowly. CRTs are used as racing vehicles in a number of African countries, including Kenya, Namibia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. CR has sold 12 CR-Ts, says Hardy. For now, however, the future of the company lies in building more higher-margin CR6s, especially for international race competitors. CR has already shipped four CR6s to China, as well as one to Canada. With the vehicle well proven in this year’s Dakar, there has been marked increase in interest from abroad, says Hardy. “We would be happy to sell between eight to ten cars to international racing teams this year. “We’ll also continue to do further research and development work, especially in among the rocks and dunes of Morocco and Namibia.