Real estate investment trust Growthpoint Properties has completed the first phase of its new Growthpoint Industrial Park, in KwaZulu-Natal. The company says the park has received keen market interest and its first tenants are already operating from the 20 300 m2 initial phase of the development, valued at R185-million. The first phase of the development’s two phases includes 15 midi-units ranging between 846 m2 and 2 065 m2 in size. The industrial park’s second phase will add some larger units to the site. The total 66 558 m2 industrial park site is midway between the Durban harbour and the King Shaka International Airport. It offers access to eThekwini’s new C3 Corridor, which links Pinetown and Mount Edgecombe. Growthpoint says its industrial park is at the confluence of several major transport arterials, with quick access to the R102, N2 and N41 freeways. “Mount Edgecombe is quickly becoming an established logistics node. Its popularity is being driven by the new C3 Corridor road infrastructure in response to the lack of new industrial land around the busy Durban harbour. “While it already caters for large-scale warehousing on the one hand and mini-units on the other, we identified a gap in the market to develop midi- and maxi-units. “Growthpoint’s skilled development team has met this need with a first-class industrial park designed especially for businesses that rely on excellent transport access,” says Growthpoint chief development and investment officer Rudolf Pienaar. He explains that the industrial park’s units are flexible, allowing businesses to be agile and change swiftly. For example, there are 5-m-high roller shutter doors that link warehouses, enabling instant expansion possibilities. About 13% of each unit’s space is dedicated to air-conditioned offices. The company says an appealing design language creates good synergies throughout the building, from the lobby and offices to the warehouse. However, Growthpoint adds that it is possible to add more office space, with each unit offering the expansion potential of a mezzanine block with stacking space below. The warehouse spaces are designed to create a pleasant environment for the people using them, with a kitchenette, canteen and ablutions. They feature laser-level surface floors that comply with free movement specifications. Each unit offers 8 m eves height that can accommodate a racking system, as well as standard in-rack sprinkler protection. Growthpoint further says that energy efficiency is at the core of the development. Motion-sensing warehouse lights can be set to 50% or 100% and change with the quality of outdoor light which streams into the bright, airy buildings through the clever use of translucent polycarbonate sheeting. Electrified perimeter fencing, controlled access and surveillance cameras are among the security measures at this fully gated and monitored park. The park’s easy truck access is enhanced by shared central super-link reticulation. Separate from the main yard, parking for staff and visitors is available at each unit. “Growthpoint is a significant property owner in the Mount Edgecombe area. Based on our experience of property performance at this strategic position, we are pleased to add Growthpoint Industrial Park as a long-term asset to our diversified industrial property portfolio,” notes Growthpoint industrial asset management head Errol Taylor.