The Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) has set its sights on the next milestone for the licensing of International Mobile Telecommunications (IMT) spectrum. The licensing process is scheduled for first quarter of the 2020/21 financial year – starting April 1 – following the receipt of submissions in response to the information memorandum on the process for the assignment of the IMT spectrum issued in November last year. Icasa will consider all the representations that have been received prior to embarking on the next steps of the licensing process. The authority, which received more than 40 written representations by the deadline on January 31, aims to outline the process that will ensue and the likely date for assignment of the high demand spectrum relating to the auction and Wireless Open-Access Network (Woan) licensing processes. “It is of critical importance that we embark on a legally sound process, underpinned by solid forward looking technical and economic considerations, all in the public interest. It is in this spirit that we engage with the submissions and all other related processes to ensure alignment with the broader government objective of ensuring universal access to broadband services for all,” says Icasa acting chairperson Dr Keabetswe Modimoeng. “The release of high-demand spectrum is the most seminal licensing process for the future of the sector. The authority is, therefore, mindful of the far-reaching consequential implications of this process – not just for the authority but for the wider South African economy.” Icasa is also considering the recommendations relating to high-demand spectrum proposed by the Competition Commission in its ‘Final Report on Data Services Market Inquiry’ and will manage any possible interdependencies between this process and its other regulatory processes, including its Mobile Broadband Services Market Inquiry and the issuing of the individual electronic network services licence to the Woan. This approach will ensure consistency and certainty in regulatory outcomes, the authority assured stakeholders in a statement on Monday.