Information and communications technology group Telkom is underway with its migration from copper-based asymmetric digital subscriber line (DSL) Internet to new-generation fibre technology for customers in all fibre-ready regions across South Africa. The switch from copper to fibre where current DSL infrastructure overlaps with the fibre-to-the-home footprint is part of the JSE-listed group’s long-term strategy to optimise user experience and reduce the cost of maintenance. “With technology advancing so rapidly, we want to help keep our customers up to date and ensure that they are making the most of what is available,” said Telkom product development and management executive Steven White, adding that customers will receive the support that they need to undergo the upgrade with minimal stress and disruption. Telkom agents are contacting customers directly to inform them regarding what to expect from the upgrade and there will not be a sudden ‘cut-off’. The gradual transition will ultimately lead to the decommissioning and replacement of old copper technology with fibre entirely, at no cost to the customers and no installation fee charged. “The only cost involved will be the monthly cost of the new Internet package that each user selects,” White pointed out. Customers will enjoy faster Internet upload and download speeds, a more stable Internet connection and reduced down-time, as fibre infrastructure is not at risk of cable theft, a problem that has plagued DSL users for a very long time. In addition, Telkom assured customers that the compulsory move away from copper would not leave them in the lurch, with the company working with customers to find an alternative connectivity solution that best suits their needs if they are not “on board” with fibre. These include wireless long-term evolution and fixed-line lookalike. “Fibre is a big part of the future-focused technology that will empower and uplift communities across South Africa, especially when it comes to aiding individuals and businesses in overcoming some of the many challenges inflicted by Covid-19,” White concluded. Telkom urged customers who have concerns regarding the transition to get in touch with an agent for further information and for details regarding fibre, how it works and why it is so superior.