Property investor and developer Atterbury has restarted construction on the Richmond Park mixed-use development in Milnerton, Cape Town. Development work at Richmond Park is proceeding in line with South Africa’s Alert Level 3 lockdown, which allows for construction projects. “We are going ahead with construction and installing services at Richmond Park, as well as completing roadworks. All the necessary hygiene and physical distancing procedures are in place for this work,” confirms Atterbury Western Cape head Gerrit van den Berg. “Besides putting more people to work safely at this difficult time, it is an ideal time for public roadworks as those people who are able to work from home are still doing so. With fewer vehicles currently using the roads, traffic disruption will be minimised,” he adds. Richmond Park is a multibillion-rand mixed-use development by shareholders Atterbury, Old Mutual Properties, the Richmond Park Communal Property Association (CPA) and Qubic 3 Dimensional Property, Bethel Property and Atlantis. Atterbury is rolling out the development of Richmond Park on behalf of the shareholders. Richmond Park is a prime business site on Cape Town’s N7 corridor. It offers four-lane road access from both the N1 and N7 highways, making it a suitable location for logistics and warehousing, Atterbury says. In line with Richmond Park’s emphasis on transport accessibility, the mixed-use precinct development includes improvements to surrounding public roads. As a popular and growing industrial node, the operating and future facilities at Richmond Park include those of Aramex, Cape Fruit Coolers, CTM, Mustek, Scoop, ACDC Dynamics, Max on Top, Corex and Sequence Logistics in conjunction with RPP. The mixed-use development also includes Richmond Corner, which is now scheduled to open on July 23. The new convenience shopping centre was only four weeks away from opening to customers when the country began its national lockdown to curb the spread of Covid-19 in late March. Construction on Richmond Corner started in May 2019, and was virtually complete when the lockdown began. Anchored by Pick n Pay, Woolworths Food and Clicks, the fully let 6 500 m2 shopping centre will provide essential food, grocery, drive-through take-aways, and health and pharmacy retail, among other things. “Richmond Corner’s location and retail mix is designed to fulfil a valuable role in its community. Now, with the national Covid-19 response, access to local retail has become even more critical,” says Van den Berg.