UK-based global major aerospace and defence group BAE Systems announced on Monday that seven additional British-based companies had joined Britain’s Team Tempest future air combat advanced technologies development programme. Team Tempest was a joint initiative between the British Ministry of Defence and UK industry (including British subsidiaries of international groups). The core industry partners in Team Tempest were BAE Systems, Leonardo UK (part of Italy’s Leonardo group), MBDA UK (the British arm of the pan-European missile group) and Rolls-Royce. The new members were Bombardier Belfast (part of Canada’s Bombardier group, but in the process of being sold to Spirit AeroSystems of the US), Collins Aerospace in the UK, GE Aviation UK (Collins UK and GE UK both being British subsidiaries of US groups), GKN Aerospace, Martin-Baker (famed for its ejector seats), Thales UK (part of the French Thales group) and research and development company QinetiQ. “We are delighted to have signed the first phase of these new agreements, which are transforming our traditional relationships with partners,” enthused BAE Systems air sector MD Dave Holmes. “We are seeking opportunities to widen the Team Tempest project and bring in the very best of UK capability and expertise, from both inside and outside of defence. They will work alongside us as we seek to develop the generation-defining combat air capability which will help safeguard the security of our nation and our allies to the end of this century.” Team Tempest already had more than 60 technology demonstration and de-risking projects under way. The aim was to develop transformational technologies both rapidly (in half the normal time) and affordably. The new members of the Team would seek to join in and support these projects, working with the core member companies. “[B]y developing the wider industry team, we will help contribute to the retention, growth and investment in a wider world-class UK skills base,” he highlighted. “Collaborations, with some of the brightest and best across the country, show that Tempest is becoming a truly national endeavour and we are delivering on our promise to take new approaches to drive significant pace and efficiency into the programme.” “This is a highly innovative project based around cutting-edge technology and drawing on a skills base where the UK excels,” affirmed UK Minister for Defence Procurement Jeremy Quin. “I am delighted that the success and strengths of Team Tempest are being enhanced through drawing on UK expertise; working with industrial partners and [a] highly capable international team we are configured for future success.”