The British government and aerospace industry are to jointly invest £400-million in researching and developing technologies that will reduce the environmental impact of aviation. The initiative, announced on Monday on the first day of a virtual Farnborough International Airshow, will see the government award grants totalling £200-million, with industry itself providing matching funding. The governmental funding will be provided through the country’s Aerospace Technology Institute (ATI) programme. One of the reasons for the launch of this green aviation initiative is to help the country’s aerospace sector recover from the effects of the Covid-19 pandemic, while also protecting aerospace jobs. The initiative includes tertiary educational institutions, such as the universities of Birmingham and Nottingham. At the same time, in a separate but complementary initiative, a UK-government funded FlyZero study programme was also announced. This will receive £15-million, granted to the ATI, to fund a study programme into the development of a commercially viable zero-carbon emissions aircraft. The study will involve some 100 experts and specialists seconded from industry and academia. “We have an incredible aerospace industry right here in the UK that defines the way aircraft are manufactured globally,” affirmed UK Secretary of State (Cabinet Minister) for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Alok Sharma. “The £400-million ATI investment will help secure our world-leading position in developing new flight technology to make air travel safer and greener into the future.” “The UK has committed to net-zero by 2050 and presently aviation is unable to access the aircraft and technology needed to deliver on this national target,” explained ATI CEO Gary Elliott. “The new breed of zero-emission aircraft will call for entirely new industrial capabilities; the supply-chain is yet to be established and that will be a major focus for FlyZero. There are big questions to answer, and the first step on this path is to develop a thorough understanding of the technological and commercial issues. … Meeting the ambition of FlyZero and hitting the net-zero target will require a long-term, collaborative approach across the whole of the UK aerospace industry. FlyZero kickstarts this process and will lay the ground for future innovation, investment and job creation.” The £400-million research and development programme will be focused on four main areas: cabin systems, engines, power systems and wings. Regarding cabin systems, technology and engineering services company Williams Advanced Engineering (WAE) is leading a consortium that will develop ultra-lightweight seats for air passengers, which will reduce the weight of airliners. “A key benefit for us of the ATI support has been to enable accelerated development of the three companies involved in the consortium,” highlighted WAE defence, aerospace and emerging markets commercial manager Stu Olden. “Additionally, by developing UK technologies and innovation, the ATI programme is enabling UK-based product development and, hopefully, future jobs. For Williams Advanced Engineering it has allowed us to participate in the aerospace sector as a non-traditional supplier.” When it comes to engines, Rolls-Royce will lead the project, which is focused on developing its UltraFan engine, which will greatly increase engine efficiency and reduce carbon emissions. The research regarding power systems will be led by Safran Electrical & Power UK (part of the French Safran group) and will be centred on using new electrical power systems to achieve more efficient use of energy on aircraft. The wings element will be led by pan-European group Airbus and will seek to deliver efficiency improvements in wing digital design processes, wing assembly, systems installation as well as the development of innovative concepts for airliners such as folding wing tips.