In a programme known as ‘ElectriCity’, Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) will join Nordic taxi operator Cabonline (NorgesTaxi), the region’s largest charge point operator Fortum Recharge, US technology developer Momentum Dynamics and the City of Oslo to build wireless, high-powered charging infrastructure for taxis in the Norwegian capital. The project will be the first wireless high-powered charging system for electric taxis in the world. It is hoped that the adoption of electric vehicles (EVs) globally will by hurried along by providing a charging infrastructure model that can be implemented almost anywhere. Fortum Recharge, which will support the installation and electrification of the project, identified the need for a more efficient charging experience for taxi drivers in Oslo. The company enlisted the support of Momentum Dynamics in integrating the wireless charging infrastructure. JLR will provide 25 Jaguar I-Pace models to Cabonline, the largest taxi network in the Nordics, to operate using the charging system. The I-Pace EV has been designed to enable Momentum Dynamic’s wireless charging technology. The plan is to install a type of charging system that does not take taxi drivers off-route during working hours. This means that multiple charging plates, rated at between 50 kW and 75 kW each, are installed in the ground, in series, at popular pick-up and drop-off points. This allows each equipped taxi to charge while queuing for the next fare. The system, which uses no cables and is situated below ground, requires no physical connection between charger and vehicle. It engages automatically and provides on average of between six and eight minutes of energy per each charge up to 50 kW. This means that the taxi receives multiple charges throughout the day, maintaining a high battery state of charge and the ability to remain in 24/7 service without driving range restrictions. “The taxi industry is the ideal test bed for wireless charging and, indeed, for high-mileage electric mobility across the board,” says JLR CE Professor Sir Ralf Speth. “The inherently safe, energy efficient and high-powered wireless charging platform will prove critical for electric fleets, as the infrastructure is more effective than refuelling a conventional vehicle.” Oslo will be the world’s first metropolitan area to install wireless, induction-based high-powered charging stations for electric taxis, in a bid to make its taxi system emission free as early as 2024. Norway is also mandating that all new cars sold in the country by 2025 are zero-emission vehicles.