The International Zinc Association (IZA) has published its newest guide on the ‘Essentials of Galvanizing’, the primary purpose of which is to be a key reference for engineers and designers globally. Speaking during the booklet’s virtual launch on July 15, IZA’s Simon Norton explained that the IZA intends to, through the booklet, “support the South African building industry, and anybody else, with useful tools to support the construction of low-maintenance, attractive, cost effective and long-lasting structures”. “The purpose of the seminar is to engage with architects, engineers and other specifiers about the benefits of using hot dip galvanized (HDG) steel on a myriad of projects, and we’ve produced the booklet with everything you’ll need to know about galvanizing,” he enthused, referring to the IZA webinar hosted by Creamer Media on July 15. This is where HDP comes in, at the heart of which is zinc, which civil engineering and galvanizing consultant Terry Smith explained takes place when suitably cleaned steel components are dipped in a bath of molten zinc at about 450 °C. When the steel is heated to 450 °C, a metallurgical reaction takes place, which forms a cost effective, abrasion resistant, corrosion control barrier that will generally “provide a maintenance free lifespan in excess of 50 years”, he said. Unlike paint, zinc and its alloys from HDG are metallurgically bonded to form a barrier coat, which is something we have known now for around 185 years, he noted. He added that the benefits of HDG include easy inspection, and that the HDG is a quick process owing to no curing times. Additionally, once the components have cooled down, they can be inspected and loaded, and are ready for use. The primary purpose of HDG, according to the IZA’s booklet, is “to protect steel in any form, including reinforcement for concrete, from corrosion”. It adds that it is a cost effective way of extending steel's service life in most environments. Smith co-authored the IZA’s booklet, which comprises a collection of informative articles, spanning the last 15 years, which cover most aspects of zinc coatings. According to Norton, the IZA supports zinc because it “is an essential for modern life”. Sustainable and recyclable, zinc is commonly used in healthcare products, ointments, lotions and even for fertilisers in the agricultural space.