Nissan South Africa (Nissan SA) will launch seven new models in South Africa in the next two years, in an effort to streamline its product portfolio in line with international developments at the Japanese manufacturer, says CEO Shinkichi Izumi. These launches will have a strong focus on sports-utility vehicles (SUVs) and bakkies, with a less expensive sedan, the Sunny, to also be introduced in markets in sub-Saharan Africa, outside South Africa. The SUVs will include a frame SUV, a C-segment cross-over, two B-segment cross-overs and the new Patrol. B-segment SUVs are currently some of the most popular vehicles on sale in South Africa. The mid-sized Terra will be one of the SUVs to be introduced, confirms Nissan SA. New pickups will include the Nissan double-cab and single cab, which Nissan counts as two models. These bakkie models will be produced at the Nissan SA plant in Rosslyn, Tshwane, as from early next year. Izumi says the NP200 half-ton bakkie and NP300 one-ton bakkie will continue production at Rosslyn, with the opportunity to refresh these models. “We are always looking at product competitiveness through refreshment of the models,” says Izumi. “That is our plan.” The NP200 is the only half-ton bakkie still on sale in South Africa. “This is quite an aggressive pipeline we have going ahead,” says Izumi. “Having said that, we are really right-sizing our product portfolio and enhancing our quality of business, including our manufacturing in South Africa. “South Africa is going to a hub in light-commercial-vehicle manufacturing to [Nissan].” Datsun is to remain in the South Africa product portfolio. Ariya EV on the Cards for SA
Launched in July, Ariya is Nissan’s new electric vehicle (EV), with a range of up to 610 km on a single charge, according to the Japanese manufacturer. While Nissan introduced South Africa’s first EV, the original Leaf, it will not bring the successor model to the local market, but rather focus on introducing the Ariya, says Nissan marketing director Kabelo Rabotho. “We looked at introducing the new Leaf to South Africa, but with the decision to focus on cross-overs and SUVs, it means the Ariya is more suitable to consider as a future EV for South Africa.” Rabotho says the first rollout of the Ariya is targeted at Japan and other major markets, with second rollout to include South Africa.

“And yes, we are looking at introducing this vehicle at the earliest possible time.”