Green economy solutions company GreenCape has entered into a collaboration agreement with Solar Impulse Foundation through the International Cleantech Network (ICN). GreenCape will help the foundation to find, select and promote 1 000 clean and profitable solutions that contribute to protecting the environment. GreenCape is the South African contact point to assist local cleantech companies to apply to join the Solar Impulse Foundation's 1 000 Efficient Solutions Label portfolio. The foundation launched the bold challenge to find, select and promote 1 000 cleantech solutions that have both positive economic and environmental impacts on the world. Through this ICN collaboration, the Solar Impulse Foundation and GreenCape share a common goal to support the development and implementation at scale of clean technologies, and encourage decision-makers around the world to adopt impact-oriented environmental regulations and energy policies. Companies with innovative cleantech solutions seeking increased competitiveness and global network expansion, especially after being constrained by the Covid-19 pandemic, are encouraged to apply for the #1000Solutions label. The Solar Impulse Foundation aims to help the cleantech innovators that developed the efficient solutions to accelerate their companies’ success. Once the solutions are labelled, the Solar Impulse Foundation provides support on six specific levels, on an international scale: better access to market, greater appeal to financial investors, support in advocacy work, feedback from industry experts, more credibility and greater global visibility. The solutions are categorised according to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals involving clean water and sanitation, affordable and clean energy, industry innovation and infrastructure, sustainable cities and communities and responsible consumption and production. Solutions will be assessed from a technical and financial standpoint, and in accordance with feasibility, which includes credibility or design and scalability, environmental benefits and profitability factors. Labelled solutions will undergo a rigorous assessment based on a verified methodology and against several criteria performed by external independent experts. Once labelled, solutions join the #1000Solutions portfolio and access exclusive benefits, such as events, business and investment opportunities, and communication support.