Barloworld Motor Retail franchise executive Marcia Mayaba has been elected as National Automobile Dealers’ Association (Nada) VP. “We are extremely excited to have Marcia on board,” says Nada chairperson Mark Dommisse. “We look forward to working closely with her on various matters impacting motor vehicle dealers from an economic, social, diversity and transformation point of view.” “It is an honour to have been appointed to the role of VP, which I embrace with excitement,” says Mayaba. “I intend to add value to the great work Nada does on behalf of its members. The association has reflected enormous tenacity in its assistance and guidance to its members during the current pandemic and ongoing crisis. What a time to be involved at this level and lead our industry.” Born in Orlando East and raised by a single mother, Mayaba had to rise to the occasion when her mother died of breast cancer in 1995. At 21, she was forced to drop out of university in the midst of studying towards a Bachelor of Law Degree to enter the job market in order to support her two younger sisters. Mayaba’s involvement in the motor industry spans some 23 years and includes truck rental, car rental, leasing and fleet management and more recently, retail experience. She joined the retail space as a trainee dealer principal (DP). She has completed an original equipment manufacturer DP programme, as well as the Sewell’s Dealership Management Trainee Programme. Her first appointment as dealer principal was in 2011. She also holds a diploma in transport and is a Gordon Institute of Business alumni. Mayaba was appointed as franchise executive, Ford and Mazda, in 2019 – a first for Barloworld and the motor industry as a whole. She is passionate about the advancement of women in the motor industry and has positioned herself at the forefront of the change and transformation journey. “I consider myself a necessary disruptor for the motor industry in South Africa. Transformation, change and inclusion are moving at a snail’s pace,” she says. Mayaba does acknowledge that the picture looks slightly better than it did when she started her journey in the motor industry in 1997.