Russian State nuclear corporation Rosatom has introduced a new mobile water treatment and desalination solution into the water scarce South African market to help promote access to clean water. The fully containerised UMKWA units, designed and produced in Russia by Rosatom subsidiary JSC Science and Innovation, can treat one ton of water an hour for on-site use or tanker distribution to nearby residents. “The units aim to provide an intermediate solution for urban and rural areas that do not currently have access to clean water, or are experiencing water disruptions owing to failed infrastructure,” said Rosatom Central and Southern Africa acting CEO Ryan Collyer. Mounted to the back of a standard one-ton truck, the units can also be configured to handle various water conditions, including sea water desalination, making them well-suited to drought stricken coastal areas. “The mobile units can be used along rivers, dams or even the ocean,” he added, noting that the system can be operational within six minutes and requires only one operator. The units, which do not require additional chemicals and make use of UV disinfection and low-pressure reverse osmosis to treat the water to World Health Organisation standards, offer support for municipal water treatment facilities, while larger containerised solutions can replace existing outdated facilities. The units are suitable for various applications, including construction sites, mines, hotels and lodges in isolated areas, hospitals and clinics, as well as for municipalities and rural development programmes. The units require a 5-kW power source, which is standard on a petrol generator; however, they can also be powered by solar energy or connected to a municipal power point. UMKWA units require little maintenance, make use of standardised filters and come with an optional maintenance support programme, he continued. “Rosatom Central and Southern Africa saw the immediate need for short term water treatment solutions in the region, and we therefore decided to fast-track the introduction of our mobile water treatment units into South Africa,” Collyer said. The company aims to distribute these units across the continent to give people access to clean water and improve living standards. “Our hope is that this will help curb the spread of the coronavirus. Beyond that, the mobile water units will help to prevent the spread of waterborne diseases such a cholera, which still claims thousands of lives each year,” he concluded.