Information technology services multinational EOH, in collaboration with risk management advisory and consultancy company Risk Insights, is making good progress on EOH’s commitment to help solve South Africa’s educational challenges by introducing a globally recognised digital education solution to the country. The iON solution is an end-to-end suite of digital education and assessment solutions that provides digital school and university platforms with curriculum management, digital learning and turnkey student management and administration capabilities. It serves as a platform for digital learning, development management and assessment in corporates, and provides a digital examination assessment and marking solution for educational institutions routinely involved in such assessments. EOH is a technology partner to the country's Solidarity Fund initiative. iON has been developed by consulting and software development company Tata Consulting Services (TCS). The product, which is highly scalable, was initially developed to serve the needs of mass education in India. "Globally, there are more than eight-million students who have been through classes and/or assessments delivered via the iON digital platform since its launch a few years ago. “Our lockdown experience has shown exactly how much teaching information can be made available online. With the proper guidance you could never set foot in a classroom and still receive a world-class education, provided you have a base level of infrastructure to make it possible. Our digital education solution has the potential to make education available to everyone, anytime, anywhere,” says EOH CEO Stephen van Coller. “The digitisation and democratisation of education have been accelerated with Covid-19-related measures across the globe. These trends are both inevitable and positive, helping to close the educational gap by making good education accessible to all children and adults. The iON suite of products is perfect to help effect this level of change in South Africa,” adds Risk Insights CE Dr Anuschka Bogdanov.