As part of a restructuring in some African markets, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles (FCA) has announced the appointment of Ismaeel Hassen as the new CEO for FCA South Africa (SA). Outgoing CEO Pierre Martin Bos will now head up the company’s operations in Morocco. “The global pandemic has placed many challenges on the global automotive industry, along with many new opportunities,” says Bos. “I am very grateful to have had the opportunity to lead the South African market for FCA as our brands have shown strong growth and potential over the past year. “Whilst I am incredibly sad to have spent less time in South Africa than I thought I would, I leave the market in very capable hands with Ismaeel at the helm and a team who has seasoned itself very quickly." No stranger to the FCA family, Ismaeel returned to South Africa in August last year after spending more than a decade in the Middle East launching many of the FCA brands and developing the network with general distributors. His experience extends across sales, product, marketing, logistics and aftersales. “FCA has an amazing portfolio of brands that provide a product for every customer profile,” says Hassen. “I was as excited to return to South Africa as I am with this new opportunity to lead these prestigious brands in South Africa, as well as right-hand-drive Africa. “I know I can make a positive and immediate difference to these exciting brands. I will be working closely with our current and future network partners to ensure that we re-affirm our presence and commitment to the market, offering global award-winning products with aggressive consumer offerings within a customer-centric best-in-class network." Hassen holds an MBA from the University of Wolverhampton, in the UK. His appointment is effective immediately. FCA is the seventh-largest automaker in the world, and includes the Fiat, Alfa Romeo, Abarth, Fiat Professional, Chrysler, Jeep and Dodge brands. FCA SA has a dealer network in South Africa responsible for the sales and service of all FCA brands, while also having representation in seven countries in East Africa.