Global logistics group DHL Express and US aerospace group Boeing jointly announced on Wednesday that the former had ordered four 767-300BCF air cargo aircraft from the latter. The suffix -BCF stands for Boeing Converted Freighter and indicates that the aircraft will be converted from standard airliners. DHL Express already operates Boeing 767-300F aircraft, which were built specifically as freighters (hence the -F suffix). DHL’s fleet numbers more than 250 aircraft. This new order is part of the modernisation programme for the group’s long-haul intercontinental fleet. “We are excited to introduce additional Boeing 767 freighters to the DHL Express air network,” affirmed DHL Express global air fleet management senior VP Geoff Kehr. “We have operated the 767-300F model across our global fleet for many years and look forward to continue investing in the platform by adding more 767-300BCFs. The freighter type offers a proven versatility and we appreciate the opportunity to further enhance efficiency while simultaneously improving our environmental footprint. This brings us closer to our Strategy 2025 goals and ensures we deliver the best quality service possible to our customers.” The 767-300BCF has almost exactly the same cargo capacity as the purpose-built 767-300F, Boeing reports. It has a structural payload of some 50 metric tons and a maximum takeoff weight of 186 880 kg. With those weights, it has a range of about 3 000 nautical miles or 5 556 km. Boeing describes the aircraft as the “most efficient medium wide-body twin-engine freighter” in the world. “Boeing’s 767 freighter, whether it is a production or converted option, offers an unmatched combination of capacity and capability as well as superior economics,” highlights Boeing commercial sales and marketing senior VP Ihssane Mounir. “We are delighted DHL has selected Boeing platforms to optimise their operations. We are committed to delivering the freighter capacity that DHL needs to succeed as one of the most trusted logistics and express cargo leaders in the world.” DHL operates in more than 220 countries and territories around the world and has a global workforce of some 380 000. It also provides specialised services for sectors such as auto-mobility, engineering, healthcare and life sciences, manufacturing and energy, retail and technology. Boeing is the biggest aerospace company in the world and has both civil and government customers in more than 150 countries.