The Independent Communications Authority of South Africa (Icasa) and the National Metrology Institute of South Africa (NMISA) have signed a strategic collaboration agreement for the exchange of information and expertise. The memorandum of understanding (MoU), signed during a video conference signing ceremony between Icasa CEO Willington Ngwepe and NMISA CEO Ndwakhulu Mukhufhi, will also enable the establishment of a framework for regulations related to electronic communications to be informed and supported by measurement science, or metrology. “Through the MoU, NMISA and Icasa will cooperate with each other over a range of functions including, but not limited to, providing support and resources to ensure the success and effectiveness of the mutually agreed project and programmes aimed at enhancing and sustaining the quality of consumer experience,” the parties said in a statement after the signing. The partnership, which provides for the exchange of information and expertise relevant to their respective mandates, will assist Icasa with the execution of its consumer protection mandate. “The MoU enables us to tap into the skills base and expertise contained within NMISA to come up with workable solutions to enhance Icasa’s enforcement capabilities in order to effectively address consumer complaints, especially with regards to consumption and/or depletion rates for data bundles and related services,” said Ngwepe. “This is an exciting milestone in NMISA’s strategic plan, which includes the development of unique measurement solutions specifically designed to enable and augment regulations. NMISA is looking forward to a long-term, successful and mutually supportive relationship with Icasa,” added Mukhufhi. The MoU is expected to enhance the role of NMISA as the provider of measurement solutions in terms of the Measurement Units and Measurement Standards Act 18 of 2006 and the role of Icasa in the protection of the end-user when using electronic communications services and networks. NMISA realises, maintains and disseminates the national measurement standards and measurement units for South Africa, providing for the international equivalence of local measurements which are traceable to these standards. In cases of disputes about the true value of a measurement, the value provided by NMISA is legally accepted as the most correct value in South Africa.