In response to the Covid-19 outbreak, the British High Commission, through the Future Cities programme, will be delivering additional support to its partner municipalities. The Global Future Cities Programme launched in South Africa earlier this year to the value of up to R180-million, as part of the UK cross-government Prosperity Fund (PF), and is aimed at addressing the essential conditions for inclusive economic growth through the achievement of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals. The programme will be providing up to an additional R42-million of technical assistance in support of partner municipalities’ Covid-19 response and recovery plans in South Africa. This assistance is in response to requests from partner municipalities to help them remain resilient and viable in the face of the many complex effects of the pandemic. “We enjoy a strong partnership with the City of Johannesburg, and are keen to respond to the city’s needs during the coronavirus pandemic. Around the world, major cities are in the front line of the response to coronavirus, and are having their resilience severely tested. We’re pleased to be able to work with cities here in South Africa, as they work hard to reduce the effects of this virus,” says British High Commissioner to South Africa Nigel Casey. This supplementary support aims to bolster existing municipal government departments in areas such as data analysis, modelling and logistics, with an emphasis on building the economic and social resilience of cities. The added capacity aims to target healthcare logistics planning, impact management in informal settlements and economic mitigation and early recovery strategies. As one of the participating cities, the City of Johannesburg responded to the offer of assistance with the request to support in its financial recovery and analysis of Covid-19 impact on urban planning and transport. "The relationship between Johannesburg and the British Embassy stems from years of collaborative and mutually beneficial interests. As the City of Johannesburg continues to battle Covid-19 with limited resources, we are grateful of the support we receive from the British taxpayers. We hope that this generous support solidifies the relationship between Johannesburg and Britain, and further advances the Prosperity Fund’s Global Future Cities Programme,” comments City of Johannesburg mayor Geoff Makhubo. The further support provided within Johannesburg aims to help municipal departments inform financial modelling and recovery approaches, and adaptation of urban planning and transport strategies in response to the pandemic. This multi-sectoral support aims to build long-term financial, economic, social and environmental resilience in Johannesburg.