President Cyril Ramaphosa has addressed the controversy surrounding the cigarette ban, assuring South Africans that government was making every effort to advance the right to life and dignity. He also applauded citizens for adhering to the lockdown provision, saying the measures had proven to be effective in delaying the spread of the coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic. On Sunday South Africa recorded 6 783 confirmed cased of Covid-19 and a death toll of 131. He acknowledged government’s apparent turn around on the banning of tobacco sales and said while the decision was bound to be controversial, it was wrong to suggest that government officials were saying and doing “whatever they want” on the issue. He said the current situation called for courage, patience, goodwill and trust between citizens and government. “On 23 April, I announced that cigarette sales would be permitted during level 4. This was based on the view of the National Coronavirus Command Council (NCCC), and which was contained in the draft framework that was published for consultation. After careful consideration and discussion, the NCCC reconsidered its position on tobacco. As a result, the regulations ratified by Cabinet and announced by Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma on 29 April extended the prohibition,” Ramaphosa explained. He added that the decision was a collective one and stressed that the regulations in place were carefully considered following consultations with various experts, constituencies and industries, and guidance from international bodies and from the experience of other countries. On the issue of alcohol sales, he noted that similar measures were in place in other countries to limit infection and also curb violence against women and children. He said the world was facing uncharted waters with not much known about the epidemiology of the virus. “It is better to err on the side of caution than to pay the devastating price of a lapse in judgment in future. While there are differing views on some of the decisions we have taken – and in some instances these have polarised opinion – government is making every effort to act in a way that advances the rights to life and dignity of all our people,” he assured. He said while most South Africans were adhering to the regulations, practising physical distancing and using face masks, the danger was still present. All  scientific models have shown that the infection rate would continue to rise at a much faster rate in the next few months, Ramaphosa warned.
 
He said the reactions and measures taken by countries would determine the speed with which the virus spreads and the number of people who were ultimately infected. The easing of the lockdown needed to be gradual and cautious, he said, stressing that as a result many regulations needed to remain in place and said it was absolutely essential that people observe them. “I know how difficult this is and I understand the concern that many of our compatriots have about how these regulations are interfering and limiting their rights. But all this is necessary. Our overriding objective is the preservation of life,” said the President.
 
He, again, stressed the importance of physical distancing and proper hygiene, saying these were the country’s best and only defences in this struggle. He went on to explain that these measures informed government’s level 4 regulations, the considerations for which are based on empirical evidence, scientific and economic data and international best practice. He said listening to citizens’ concerns during the lockdown had been one of the distinguishing features of how the government had managed the pandemic. He said government would continue to listen to citizens’ concerns and it was prepared to make adjustments that balanced people’s concerns about the challenges they faced with the need to save lives.
 
“At this difficult time, our collective energies must be focused on ensuring that health and life is preserved, that the delivery of food, water, health care, social security and social support is not disrupted. Under these extraordinary circumstances, as government, as individuals and as society we will at times make mistakes. When these occur, we will correct them. But we must carry on, losing neither our nerve nor our resolve,” said Ramaphosa.