The global representative body of the airline industry, the International Air Travel Association (Iata), has welcomed the issuing, in Europe, of the Covid-19 Aviation Health Safety Protocol. This has been jointly drawn up by the European Aviation Safety Agency (Easa) and the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), to provide guidelines for the safe resumption of air travel in Europe. “Easa and ECDC has [sic] delivered a sensible framework for restarting aviation while protecting public health,” affirmed Iata regional VP: Europe Rafael Schvartzman. “The guidance is clear that while airlines should seek to maintain physical distancing where practicable, flexibility on seating arrangements is permitted. And quarantine requirements are not necessary.” The Easa and ECDC protocol was in line with recommendations from both the airlines and the airports. It involved the application of a number of temporary public health measures, in a layered approach to ensure passenger safety. These measures included the maintenance of physical distancing at airports, such as measures to ensure there would be no queuing at security and at baggage drop and claim points. Masks should be worn at all times in the airport and on the aircraft, and staff should be equipped with the proper personal protective equipment. Both airports and airliners should be subjected to enhanced cleaning, particularly for often-touched surfaces. And, when the number of passengers, the configuration of the cabin, mass and balance requirements permit, airlines should ensure physical distancing between passengers (with the exception that people from the same household could be seated together). “But it is absolutely essential that all European States apply these guidelines in harmonised and mutually recognised ways,” he stressed. “Local deviations and exceptions will damage public confidence and make it harder to operate effectively. This would be harmful to public health and the economic recovery. Iata will support States to implement these guidelines in the fastest and most efficient way.” Easa has stated that the measures it and the ECDC have proposed will be evaluated and updated on a regular basis, in accord with increasing information about the disease and diagnostic and preventive measures effective for it. Iata assured that it was ready to support the authorities in this regard. “The safety of our passengers and crew is the number one concern,” stated Schvartzman. “In Europe, we have been in lockdown for many weeks. The tourism sector, representing millions of jobs across Europe, is particularly dependent on connectivity re-starting. … With these sensible guidelines in place, we can all look forward to the freedom that only flying can provide.” For the world as a whole, the International Civil Aviation Organisation’s (ICAO’s) Covid-19 Aviation Recovery Taskforce is working on global standards for the safe re-starting of air travel. The Easa/ECDC protocol will make a major contribution to this process. ICAO is a specialised agency of the United Nations.