Cybersecurity multinational Kaspersky on May 19 announced that, as part of the Global Transparency Initiative, it had developed a cybersecurity skills development programme. The Cyber Capacity Building Programme will be available during the latter part of the year, says Kaspersky public affairs head Oleg Abdurashitov. The company has also made its Transparency Centre services, which provide access to information about internal security practices and technologies, available virtually. "With digitisation rapidly increasing, robust information technology (IT) infrastructure is vital for the smooth integration and running of various software and hardware platforms, as well as the efficiency of operations," Abdurashitov says. Kaspersky has enabled remote access to the services of its Transparency Centres in the form of a ‘blue-piste’ assessment option, which allows users to get acquainted with the company’s engineering practices and data-protection standards. With this service, Kaspersky’s trusted partners will be able to gain an overview of its security and transparency best practices, as well as its products and services. Kaspersky’s security experts are also ready to answer any questions regarding the company’s data-processing practices and the functioning of its solutions, as well as a live demonstration of a source-code review with the organisation, explains Abdurashitov. "Organisations' IT infrastructure can be subject to various cybersecurity-related risks, making cyber-resilience crucial. As part of global supply chains and/or critical infrastructure networks, different components of the IT infrastructure can be compromised, causing harm to public security, as well as economic and social wellbeing. "Fortunately, organisations can evaluate and ensure the security and integrity of these elements. The Cyber Capacity Building Programme will provide product-security evaluation training to businesses, government organisations and academic institutions that need IT infrastructure security assessment skills," he says. Through the programme, organisations will be able to identify cybersecurity risks, as well as manage and mitigate them, he adds.