Branded food services franchisor Famous Brands has reopened a limited number of restaurants for delivery-only services across a broad geographical spectrum in South Africa in a phased programme, with effect from May 1. In terms of the Famous Brands international jurisdiction and in compliance with government-legislated lockdowns implemented across its trading jurisdictions, the group’s restaurants have been closed, with the exception of limited operations in some markets. Famous Brands manages outlets in South Africa, Angola, Botswana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Zambia and Zimbabwe, the Middle East and the UK. The reopening of some business in South Africa is in line with Stage 4 lockdown regulations, which came into effect on May 1. In terms of these regulations, restaurants may now offer delivery-only services. Famous Brands notes that the outlets that have opened are confined to controlled trading hours between 09:00 and 19:00, with all deliveries needing to be dispatched in advance of 19:00. Famous Brands’ leading brands will be the primary providers of this delivery-only service. These brands include Steers, Debonairs Pizza and Fishaways, and to a much smaller extent, Wimpy and Mugg & Bean. Details of the operating activities of each brand will be communicated on the individual brand websites or relevant social media channels. Where practicable, the group’s signature South African brand offerings will trial delivery operations with limited geographical coverage. In terms of the supply chain operation, support to the brands’ franchise partners will be provided by the logistics division. However, at this point, it is not deemed necessary to bring manufacturing capability on line. Famous Brands notes that while it is hopeful that these trading activities might provide a much-needed boost to revenue and morale, the viability of this limited delivery offering remains to be proved. In addition, the group’s manufacturing and logistics operations have also been closed, with the exception of a small component of direct sales to the retail market and one manufacturing plant with essential-supplier status – Lamberts Bay Foods, which supplies potato products. While the impact of the lockdowns on Famous Brands’ business has been varied across the geographies, the group has effectively generated negligible revenue for a period of five weeks. In the UK, with effect from April 29, GBK Restaurants commenced reinstating limited delivery services in a few restaurants where practicable. This will potentially form the basis of a slow and phased restart. Wimpy UK has successfully operated delivery and take-away services where practicable and in line with regulations since March 23. In terms of Africa and Middle East region operations, Famous Brands restaurants in Angola, Botswana, Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, the UAE, Zambia and Zimbabwe continue to trade, albeit with limited services.