Information and communication technology solutions provider Datacentrix has launched new thermal measurement solutions that enable the simultaneous temperature measurement of multiple individuals. Fortifying its existing continuous services offering to include smart fever screening solutions, the all-inclusive thermal, contactless and accurate temperature measurement technology is suitable for high crowd density areas and public facilities with multiple access points. “The gradual relaxation of lockdown regulations . . . means that several industries have resumed operation from the beginning of May,” said Datacentrix commercial and technology solutions MD Johann Coetzee. The industries, such as agriculture, forestry and fisheries, manufacturing, mining, general services, construction, restaurants for delivery only and recycling sectors, are required to operate under level-four lockdown conditions. This means that various protection measures need to be in place, with organisations required to have monitoring systems that will ensure compliance with safety protocols and help to identify infections among staff members. “Datacentrix is doing all that it can to assist businesses to tackle the new, post Covid-19 normal,” he added, noting that solutions include fixed, long-range fever screening and a hand-held patrolling option, for fast, precise temperature measurement of crowds. The group has an extensive solution portfolio to meet the specific needs of any private or public organisation. This includes a hand-held thermographic screening solution for seamless inspections and spot-checks and working from a distance of 1.5 m to three metres; a long-range turret or bullet camera, to identity and track individuals with higher body temperatures from between 4.5 m and nine metres; and a calibrator that can increase temperature measurement accuracy from around 0.5° C to 0.3 °C. The solutions can scan up to 30 individuals concurrently and are powered by artificial intelligence and advanced algorithms, with bi-spectrum thermal and optical image view monitoring and detailed quality images. The WiFi-enabled solutions, ensuring connectivity to smartphones, computers or notebooks, are secured with authentication, encryption, access control and Internet protocol address filtering. “The new solution from Datacentrix will help to eliminate the long queues and increased risk of infection associated with time-intensive, manual temperature measuring, assisting companies to take a reliable and effective line of defence against Covid-19 as multiple industries gear up for a return to work,” Coetzee concludes.