Technology group Wärtsilä has published an extensive interactive map on cost-optimal, 100% renewable electricity systems globally. The map provides information on the potential of renewable energy in relation to geographical regions and their solar and wind conditions. Wärtsilä has modelled 145 countries and different regions of the world in one-hour dispatch granularity to provide an illustrative guide as to the cost-optimal potential of developing 100% renewable electricity systems. The work, which highlights the company’s highly advanced power system modelling capabilities, was carried out under an agreement with Lappeenranta-Lahti University of Technology (LUT) in Finland to collaborate on research on 100% renewable energy systems, and relies on LUT’s database of power systems data. The results of the modelling work reveal the importance of a wider technology mix and different types of flexibility in high-renewable power systems, Wärtsilä  says. Its power system modelling has compared two options; the first being a cost-optimal carbon neutral and 100% renewable energy system using flexible gas power plants and Power-to-X technology providing synthetic fuel for flexible gas generation, while the other option is using only solar, wind and battery energy storage. The differences in capacity build needs and system costs are highlighted. The map also highlights the importance and need for short-term flexibility provided by battery energy storage in high-renewable energy systems. It also emphasises the essentiality of flexibility in load balancing to support the industry’s transition. “Wärtsilä has taken a leading role in supporting the energy sector as it undergoes transformation towards greater flexibility, efficiency and sustainability. "The benefit of this project is that it provides a picture of how systems using only renewable sourced energy can look like, and how much different types of capacity are required for 100% renewable electricity systems. It shows the role that different technologies have in power systems, and how they work together. "The aim is to help our customers in choosing future-proof solutions that will optimise operational costs of their power systems,” says Wärtsilä Energy Business strategy and business development director Matti Rautkivi.