Wichita-based private company Koch Industries has completed the acquisition of the remaining portion of Infor from San Francisco-based private equity investment firm Golden Gate Capital. Infor, a global company in business cloud software, has been a key component of Koch Industries’ technological transformation. Koch Industries’ companies have made more than $26-billion in technology-related investments in the past six years, transforming a global portfolio of businesses spanning multiple industries. In addition to being an investor since 2017, Koch Industries has been a key customer, implementing Infor solutions across its businesses in areas like enterprise resource planning, human resources, supply chain, asset management and finance. “This acquisition brings new key capabilities to Koch Industries to accelerate digital transformation, while providing Infor with resources and industry knowledge to continue growing its expertise in mission critical software for industries like manufacturing, retail and distribution, among others.” “Additionally, Infor’s industry-leading Healthcare Operations Platform and Interoperability Solutions extend Koch Industries’ involvement in healthcare, where Koch Industries’ companies are already engaged in connected device manufacturing, medical product purification, and hospital supplies,” says Infor Services at iOCO MD Mark Bannerman. Infor is now a standalone subsidiary of Koch Industries and continues to operate under the company’s current management team from its headquarters in New York City. The acquisition positions Infor as one of the most well-capitalised companies in technology, the company posits. Infor has invested about $4-billion in product design and development to deliver industry specific CloudSuites that solve challenging operational issues for over 68 000 customers globally. “Joining Koch Industries is an exciting new chapter in Infor’s history. It allows us to take a long-term approach, focused on developing industry-specific solutions that help customers modernize and drive immediate, tangible impact,” says Infor CEO Kevin Samuelson.