Wind energy representative organisation, the Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC,) along with signatories representing all the major international wind industry corporates and associations, reports that wind power is a key building block for economic recovery from the impact of Covid-19. In a statement released by the GWEC, highlighting wind power’s role in the global economic recovery from the Covid-19 crisis and laying out the key policy actions that must be put into motion to realise a sustainable economic recovery, it notes that wind power will enable governments to renew critical infrastructure for a sustainable future. The wind industry will help to deliver jobs, clean and affordable power and energy security needed for a sustainable economic recovery, the statement notes. Calling on governments, intergovernmental bodies and global lending institutions, the statement suggests key actions policy makers can take to put wind energy investment at the centre of their economic recovery and growth plans with three overarching themes. These include investment for a sustainable and resilient future, an enabling environment for clean energy and empowerment of people to drive the energy transition forward. GWEC CEO Ben Backwell says the Covid-19 pandemic has had an unprecedented social and economic impact around the world. “How we recover from the crisis depends on the actions we all take over the coming months. We have the opportunity here to rebuild better, help kickstart sustainable economic recovery and build the energy infrastructure of the future.” He adds that young people in particular will bear the financial, social, health and environmental costs of the stimulus plans now being designed, and carry the debt associated with this spending. “We must make sure they are able to benefit from today’s decisions.” At the same time, Backwell says governments should establish a principle of “no harm” for economic stimulus spending and ensure that this does go to reviving fossil fuel industries that need to be phased out to achieve the energy transition and head off the threat of dangerous and irreversible climate change. GWEC chairperson and Vestas group marketing, communications and public affairs senior VP Morten Dyrholm states that the wind sector is one of the world's most promising industries. “Policies and investment frameworks that further advance this industry are therefore central to boost growth as our economies recover.” He says that, not only can the wind power industry support millions of jobs and billions in investment, but the immense benefits that it can bring to society as a whole, such as affordable power, cleaner air and resilient infrastructure, means that the return on investment for wind makes it a logical choice for countries seeking green recovery after the pandemic. WindEurope CEO Giles Dickson adds that the long-term impact of Covid-19 depends on the political action taken now. In Europe, he says the Green Deal offers the route to economic recovery. “Governments should align their recovery packages with climate goals and invest in the job-creating potential of onshore and offshore wind. Their economies will bounce back stronger and more resilient.” The statement has been signed by the major corporates in the wind sector including Vestas, Siemens Gamesa, Iberdrola, Mingyang Smart Energy, MHI Vestas, Acciona, Nordex, ReNew Power, EDPR, ZF, Orsted, Goldwind and Envision. It has also been signed by wind and renewable energy associations such as WindEurope, the American Wind Energy Association, the Chinese Wind Energy Association, the Brazilian Wind Energy Association, the Mexican Wind Energy Association, RES4Africa, the South African Wind Energy Association, the Japan Wind Power Association, the Russian Association of Wind Power Industry, the Japan Renewable Energy Institute, SER Colombia, the Mongolian Wind Energy Association and the Turkish Wind Energy Association.