HP and the African Union Commission (AUC) are working to expand digital learning opportunities for youth through two online learning platforms that contribute to the 'one-million by 2021' initiative. The collaboration covers various initiatives, including the exchange of information and expertise and the promotion of online platforms to support digital learning, while the 'one-million by 2021' initiative aims to provide opportunities to young Africans from the 55 member States in the areas of education, employment, engagement and entrepreneurship. The AU and HP are prioritising digital learning opportunities for African youth through its HP Learning Initiative for Entrepreneurship (HP Life) and BeOnline programmes, two unique online learning platforms that can be used by Ministers to support schools and educators in their distance learning endeavours, said HP Africa MD and VP Elisabeth Moreno. “HP and AU joint efforts have the potential to uplift access of education and opportunities for career work and economic growth. “Today, technology can support new styles of learning. Personal computers and tools designed for education can offer students flexibility of time, place and pace of learning, whether in or out of the classroom, or in a blend of environments,” she continued. To this end, HP has pledged to enable better learning outcomes for 100-million people by 2025, as well as adding one-million users to HP Life between 2016 to 2025. The collaboration was cemented at the Extra-Ordinary Session of the Specialised Technical Committee on Education, Science and Technology held virtually on April 30. “This partnership speaks directly to AU chairperson Moussa Faki Mahamat’s 'one-million by 2021' initiative by providing educational opportunities which will assist in positioning our youth to venture into the entrepreneurial sector,” added AUC Department of Human Resources, Science and Technology commissioner Professor Sarah Anyang Agbor. The commitment further aligns with the AU’s Continental Education Strategy for Africa, which aims to change Africa’s education and training systems to meet the knowledge, competencies, skills, innovation and creativity required to nurture core values and promote sustainable development on a continental level. “Education is a fundamental human right that should be available regardless of a person’s age, class, race, gender or location,” said Moreno, adding that the collaboration aims to promote innovations that hold the best potential to make lifelong learning a reality. In line with the most recent regional governments’ directives for distance learning, the programme aims to support schools and universities in establishing a fully-fledged virtual learning environment, by providing expertise and tools at no cost. “The partnership with HP will accelerate our education response to Covid-19 especially and have long-term benefits,” said Agbor. BeOnline was developed by HP in partnership with learning innovations group Classera to assist the endeavours of the education community, while the HP Foundation created its global programme HP Life to provide business and information technology (IT) skills training free of charge to people all over the world. The online community and more than 30 self-paced courses are designed to help users develop business and IT skills in their own time and at their own pace. The courses are modular, interactive, and full of information and practical exercises that enable users to grow their business skills.