Telecommunications group MTN is providing R2-million in critical information and communications technology (ICT) equipment and infrastructure across Gauteng in support of the fight against Covid-19. The group donated 20 desktop computers and is providing WiFi access, all valued at R800 000, to all medical personnel and patients at the Gauteng Department of Health’s emergency Covid-19 quarantine and healthcare facility at Nasrec, in Johannesburg. MTN is also providing 500 seven-inch tablets, with 3 GB data provision for three months, for community healthcare workers following the call by the Office of the Gauteng Premier for essential ICT tools. The tablets and data, valued at R1.05-million, will be used to capture and record information from community screenings in real-time. “We believe that by harnessing the power of technology and leveraging our extensive community network, developed by the MTN Foundation over the past 19 years, we can work with government to make a meaningful impact in curbing the spread of the virus – both in South Africa’s economic hub, and beyond,” says MTN South Africa corporate affairs executive Jacqui O’Sullivan. MTN is also providing ICT equipment to other key provinces, particularly the hard-hit Western Cape and KwaZulu-Natal. MTN is contributing a further 350 seven-inch tablets, valued at R650 000, to other provinces to support healthcare workers on the ground. The group is also working with national government to provide food parcels to the most vulnerable communities across South Africa. “At a national level, food security has become critical during the nationwide lockdown,” she said. To assist, MTN South Africa is distributing 5 500 food parcels, to the value of R3.5-million, to the worst-affected communities, assisting about 27 500 beneficiaries. “Sadly, it is the communities that have the least resources to mitigate the impact of this pandemic that are the hardest hit. We believe that these food parcels will serve as a lifeline to many economically marginalised communities, particularly during this time when many of the people within these communities are unable to go out and make a living,” said O’Sullivan. The initiatives formed part of MTN Group’s R250-million relief package implemented over the past few weeks. MTN South Africa has been working closely with government, at both national and provincial levels, to align their support to the State’s primary focus areas, based on where the greatest need is – and mobilising support accordingly, she explained. “We hope that these contributions, and others that have been made in the past month or so, will assist government in its efforts to put an end to the pandemic,” O’Sullivan concluded.