EOH consulting engineering subsidiary Dihlase has designed a modular intensive-care unit (ICU) and isolation ward that contains all necessary electricity, water, air and sanitation infrastructure systems and which can be built and deployed to where needed in Southern Africa within weeks, says EOH Dihlase regional manager Mohammed Rawat. The ICUlate module is built within a 12-foot container and is one of two designs the firm created to deal with the rise in demand for isolation wards and ICU beds as the number of Covid-19 infections spread, as well as in preparation for the peak of infections when the greatest demand for ICU beds will be experienced. "The ICUlate can be built in two to three weeks, dropped off where needed and then linked to a hospital or healthcare facility. Dihlase is currently mainly retrofitting this and our other solutions for private hospitals and provincial government departments in Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal and the Western Cape," Rawat tells Engineering News. This will enable healthcare facilities to expand their ICUs by adding as many bolt-on facilities as necessary. The module complies with all the national requirements for water, sanitation, insulation, fire safety and air management as used in medical operations, he says. "The ICUlate uses the extraction and air-scrubbing system we had designed for tuberculosis hospitals in KwaZulu-Natal about eight years ago. This air extraction system protects visitors and healthcare workers from infection." Further, another solution designed by Dihlase is retrofitted wards, which use prefabricated walls to convert general wards, empty wards and unused spaces into isolation wards. The company is mainly involved in this work, but has also done design work to enable the rapid construction of a temporary hospital that can be completed within a few weeks. "We did not know how big a temporary hospital would be, so we created a modular design based on clusters of 25 beds. Using our prefabricated designs and a few ICUlate modules linked together, we can build a temporary hospital of 200 to 500 beds within a few weeks," says Rawat. The company's work teams have essential service permits and are able to build these solutions where needed, he adds. The main design criterion was time, and the design is centred on enabling healthcare facilities to prepare for the peak of infections and for the solutions to be quickly deployed, he says. However, the ICUlate modules can also be used as screening laboratories and can be changed to suit the healthcare facility's needs once the peak of infections has passed, as well as be relocated, if necessary. Dihlase has already received a query from charity organisation Gift of the Givers about potentially using the modules as screening and testing laboratories. Additionally, Dihlase can provide its solutions to other Southern African countries, and has already received a query from Lesotho and responded with a proposal, says Rawat. "One of the main reasons we started this project was to protect healthcare workers, provide them with the tools and conditions they require to treat patients and prevent them from getting infected. "While the ICUlate solution is designed specifically for the Covid-19 epidemic, they can be changed and will provide value for our private and government clients over the long term," he concludes.