Following the easing of the national lockdown to Level 4 since May 1, the International Trade Administration Commission of South Africa (Itac) has scaled up its operations accordingly. With the gradual opening of some sectors, Itac will, as far as possible, provide import and export control, tariff investigations and trade remedy services to assist stakeholders. Itac advises that it will only issue permits for goods falling under sectors that are allowed to operate under lockdown Alert Level 4, which will broaden with Alert Level 3 in due course. Further, the commission will be receiving and processing rebate permit applications related to goods imported for the relief of distress of persons in cases of famine or natural disaster; under any technical assistance agreement or in terms of any obligations under any multilateral international agreement. Current holders of Itac rebate permits issued of this nature will expire on May 31 and new applications for permits will be required. In terms of trade remedies, Itac says questionnaire responses should still be submitted within the prescribed time periods by participating exporters, unless an extension has been granted as provided for in the relevant regulations. Exporters are advised that international travel and, therefore, on-the-spot verifications, remain suspended for the time being but that all efforts will be made to verify the information submitted by conducting desktop verifications. Therefore, exporters are requested to submit additional information, where necessary, through email to enable desktop verification. Exporters are advised that if verification of the information submitted by them cannot take place, the commission may disregard the information submitted and make a finding on the basis of the facts available to it. Similarly, importers are advised that questionnaire responses must be submitted electronically within the prescribed time periods, unless an extension has been granted as provided for in the relevant regulations. Importers are advised that on-the-spot verifications remain suspended for the time being and all efforts will be made to verify the information submitted by conducting desktop verifications. Importers are therefore requested to submit additional information, where necessary or required, through email to enable desktop verification. New trade remedy applications can be submitted to Itac and arrangements can be made with the senior managers of the commission to submit hard copy applications. Applicants are advised that all efforts will be made to verify the information submitted to Itac by conducting desktop verifications. Applicants are requested to submit additional information, where necessary or required, through e-mail to enable desktop verification. If verification of the information submitted cannot take place, the commission will not be able to proceed with initiation of investigations.