The World Health Organisation (WHO) has expressed concern at the potential impact of the coronavirus (Covid-19) on food security, which it says could worsen malnutrition in Africa. WHO regional director for Africa Dr Matshidiso Moeti warns that the virus is threatening livelihoods and household economies while the continent grapples with hunger and undernourishment. He further warns that people could be more vulnerable to diseases as a result and that the effects will be far reaching. “In Africa, it is estimated that one in five people is undernourished, and that 30% of children under five – approximately 59-million children – have stunted growth, greater than the global average of 21.9%. Wasting occurs in approximately 7.1% of children in Africa. The continent has the highest burden of malnutrition compared with other parts of the world, in terms of percentage of the population,” he reveals. As many as 73-million people in Africa are acutely food insecure. This is worsened by the restriction of food imports and agricultural activity, all owing to lockdown restrictions. Moeti also points out that malnutrition is a concern for those who had not adequately stocked up on food before the lockdown. More frequent eating of processed and canned foods and reduced physical exercise could worsen obesity and diabetes, risk factors that have been documented as increasing the severity of Covid-19, he said. “Covid-19 does not treat us equally, and whether or not we have a healthy, nutritionally balanced diet is a key factor in how our bodies respond to the virus. If we are not getting enough food, or not eating enough of the right sorts of food, our bodies will find it harder to fight off Covid-19 infection,” he warned. WHO has stressed the importance of wholegrains, cereals, lentils, peas and beans in diets. The organisation has also issued guidelines for ending lockdowns and recommends that vulnerable households receive food assistance, medical supplies and treatment capacities are reserved for handling patients with acute malnutrition, and screening and referral mechanisms for acute malnutrition are in place. “As countries begin to relax their lockdowns, essential health services must be in place to meet the challenges posed by malnutrition. It is important to remember that easing a lockdown should be thought of not as an event, but as a dynamic, data-driven process. If the epidemiological evidence suggests that restrictions need to remain in place, governments should ensure that measures are taken to alleviate hunger that might arise as a result of these restrictions,” Moeti said.