In its quest to ensure that no worker in need is left behind, the Department of Employment and Labour (DEL) is making all efforts to reach domestic workers and farm labourers so that they can benefit from the Covid-19 relief scheme. The scheme, which is part of the basket of government-wide services to ensure the worst effects of the coronavirus pandemic are mitigated, has already paid out billions of rands to workers who may not be earning a salary as a result of the lockdown. “Society is judged by how it tries to take care of the most vulnerable in its midst. This is why government in general and the Department of Employment and Labour in particular, are doing everything in their power to shield the most vulnerable from the worst of the pandemic. “Since the lockdown was announced, the DEL, through the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF), has handed out almost R11-billion in benefits to workers through employers. We have appealed to employers, especially those who employ domestic workers and farm labourers, to apply on their behalf so that they are not left wanting. “We sincerely hope that employers, especially in these two sectors, heed our call. We have also enlisted the help of a private company which is helping us trace these workers through their cell phones so that they are aware of the benefit and either get the employers to claim on their behalf or reach out to the UIF themselves,” says Employment and Labour Minister Thulas Nxesi. Private company Interfile has offered to run the SMS service at no cost to the UIF to reach these sectors. The department is currently working on a database to try and reach these workers. According to the department's records, 91 406 domestic workers are on the database but only 2 968 (3%) have their cell numbers listed and only 25 518 (28%) have email addresses. “We appeal to employers of domestic workers, those who may have difficulties paying them to ensure that they access these services as soon as possible. The disbursements from UIF could also act as top-up for reduced salaries and these are necessary for our mothers and sisters as they really need the break,” says Nxesi. So far, the Fund has disbursed just under R12-billion through 167 524 employers, benefitting 2.09-million workers. A total of R1.55-million has been paid to 56 641 workers through bargaining councils representing 909 employers. The fund continues to pay ordinary benefits amounting to R1.66-million for 184 207 recipients since March 26.