Solar-powered outdoor gear manufacturer and cleantech innovator GoSun has unveiled its eighth crowdfunded solar product – a portable, solar-powered water purification and sanitation system. The new GoSun Flow uses solar energy to filter 99.99% of pathogens from water and can function as a portable handwashing station, warm shower and can provide clean drinking water. Small enough to fit into a backpack, the system provides an easy, convenient way to wash your hands with clean water anywhere and anytime, said GoSun founder and CEO Patrick Sherwin. GoSun, with years of development, has designed the Flow to provide for easy outdoor water needs, unrivalled for both water purification and delivery in a mobile package. “As we all know, coronavirus is disrupting the world in a way that has not happened in our lifetime. At this time of need, we have expanded our capabilities and accelerated the development of our portable water purification and sanitation system, the GoSun Flow,” he said. The system serves as “an entire kitchen sink”, and with available upgrades, can be converted into a full-on portable shower complete with clean, hot water. “The all-in-one unit includes a faucet, pump, filter, powerbank and solar panels. It can also be powered by a USB outlet,” Sherwin continued. The Flow adds to GoSun’s full ecosystem of innovative, solar-powered cleantech products, which includes solar-powered cookers, lighting, batteries and coolers that allow people to improve their quality of life without requiring the use of fossil fuels or deforestation. GoSun Flow is available for preorder on Indiegogo starting from $149. Sherwin added that, with every GoSun Flow purchase, two trees are planted through the cleantech solar company’s partnership with Trees for the Future. To date, GoSun has helped plant over 40 000 trees. “Being able to function and adventure during the Covid-19 pandemic is becoming critical, so GoSun is working to help fuel our customers’ outings and keep them safe. Now, with a kitchen sink that fits in your backpack, you are able to have freshwater on-demand, when you are away from home,” Sherwin concluded. GoSun, which reported $1.87-million in revenue in 2019, is undertaking an equity crowdfunding raise through StartEngine.