Telecommunications giant Vodacom has started engaging communities to intensify security around its base stations to guard against vandalism and battery theft. Communities members will be recruited, trained and accredited – work with police – serving as “monitoring personnel” under a new model to secure its sites. “Incidents of base station vandalism have significantly gotten worse over the last few years,” said Vodacom Group CEO Shameel Joosub, noting that the crime is being perpetuated by organised syndicates that always find new ways to commit this type of crime. “Our security teams on the ground have observed that quite often syndicates target base stations in far-flung and secluded areas because they know it will take police a long time to react. Hence, our sites in remote areas are repeatedly hit,” said Vodacom Group chief risk officer Johan Van Graan. Theft and vandalism, and its subsequent damage, is costing network providers hundreds of millions of rands worth of damage every year. Vodacom reported a 35% increase year-on-year in the number of battery thefts at its base stations, with an average of 600 incidents a month of sites impacted by theft or damage. “We are losing between R120-million and R130-million to vandalism and theft each year. Nonetheless, we are not sitting on our laurels and are fighting back by coming up with innovative measures to stem the tide of battery theft,” Joosub assured. Vodacom is testing a new model to secure its sites by forging partnerships with members of the community. “As part of this new model, we recruit local people to serve as monitoring personnel to be our eyes and ears on the ground and provide us critical information police can use to effect arrests,” van Graan said. Locals will be trained and accredited, and linked with the local policing community forum and local South African Police Services to provide support when arrests must happen. “In all the provinces where this model is currently being tested, it has yielded positive results,” he said, citing a substantial reduction in break-ins at at-risk sites owing to the enlistment of local people to secure its sites. “This demonstrates that the number-one line of defence against site vandalism is the local community and vigilant community members who report incidents of battery theft or site vandalism to police,” he added. Each theft incident can result in the network in that area being down for days, and can severely impact businesses, as well as anyone relying on the internet to study and remain in contact with friends and family. Vodacom’s plans to spend R1-billion in the current financial year to ensure its network is able to cope with widespread electricity blackouts, which will include intensified security around the telco’s base station sites and the installation of additional batteries and generators to ensure connectivity during loadshedding.