The Department of Communications and Digital Technologies has green-lighted the resumption of certain film and television (TV) production operations within the risk-adjusted strategy for the information and communications technology (ICT) sector. Communications and Digital Technologies acting Minister Jackson Mthembu on Monday, May 4 ,said that the directions have been gazetted, allowing for electronic communication services and network services, advertising agencies, film and TV production companies to resume operations. This followed President Cyril Ramaphosa’s tabling of the Covid-19 Risk-Adjusted Strategy to guide the social, educational and economic activities which can be undertaken during the state of national disaster. “These directions apply in addition to the existing restrictions and rules that are in place across all sectors and alert levels, including Covid-19 health protocols and sanitation requirements,” he said in a statement. Under the alert level 4, sectors and sub-sectors that are permitted to be operational include the operation of electronic communications services and network services and the manufacturing of telecommunications infrastructure, including electronic communications facilities and end-user and subscriber equipment. Further, construction and any related services, such as telecommunications infrastructure, electronic communications facilities and the construction and fitting out of data centres currently being built can resume. Broadcasting services, online services, productions for local broadcast and live streaming, advertising agencies, film and TV productions using local cast and crew are permitted to operate under alert level 4, while access to accessories, including set-top-boxes, computers, mobile telephones and other home office equipment, including installation, maintenance and repair, will be opened up. The regulations also opened up the wholesale and retail sector, including stores, spaza shops, e-commerce and informal traders for the production and sale of airtime and data, online and physical retail sale, delivery, collection and replacement of ICT equipment, network equipment, end-user and subscriber equipment and ancillary equipment to support level 4 services, as well as to facilitate work-from-home arrangements. Also permitted are ICT services for all private and business customers and postal and courier services related to the transportation of medical products, ICT equipment and other end-user and subscriber equipment. Financial services, such as the provision of banking services and social grant payments by the South African Post Bank, through the South African Post Office branches and other methods, shall continue to be operational. “The gazette of these directions follows consultation with the sector and their plans on how they will mitigate the spread of the Covid-19. "The directions further include a monitoring and compliance approach that will be followed by sector regulators, industry representative bodies and through the department’s Covid-19 Project Management Office,” he concluded. The directions came into effect May 2.