South Africa’s 2020 wine grape crop will bring “exceptional” wines to consumers, following favourable conditions throughout the season, the South African wine industry’s yearly 'Wine Harvest Report 2020' shows. “Although it’s always important to take our diversity over ten wine grape growing regions into account, the industry had a very good season overall, which we believe will bring great quality wines to consumers,” says industry representative body Vinpro consultation service manager of wine Conrad Schutte. The 2020 wine grape crop is estimated at 1.34-million tonnes, according to the latest estimate of industry body South African Wine Industry Information and Systems on April 24. This is 8.2% larger than the 2019 harvest. Weather conditions were favourable in general and the bunch numbers looked promising early in the season, but windy conditions during the set and sensitive berry growth stages resulted in smaller berries and a lighter crop in some areas. The season was also characterised by great variation between, and even within, the same vineyard blocks in areas that experienced dry conditions. The Stellenbosch, Swartland, Cape South Coast, Paarl and Breedekloof regions all harvested more wine grapes than in 2019, with the Olifants River region almost returning to its normal production levels after being one of the regions hardest hit by the recent drought. The Klein Karoo region still struggles with the ongoing drought, which was also experienced in certain parts of the Robertson region, while frost damage resulted in great crop losses in the Northern Cape. COVID-19 Although the harvesting season kicked off around two weeks earlier than usual, the announcement of the Covid-19 lockdown, in effect from March 26, created a scurry among many producers to harvest the last grapes of the season and complete winemaking processes in cellars. Wine-related activities were initially prohibited, but government made a last-minute concession which allowed for the harvesting and storage activities essential to prevent the wastage of primary agricultural goods during the lockdown. At the time, around 40 000 t still needed to be harvested. “With uncertainties during the announcement of the lockdown some producers decided to harvest the grapes without prejudice just to get it to the cellar, while others waited for optimal ripeness to ensure exceptional quality,” Schutte says. QUALITY “We are excited about the exceptional wines that will flow from the 2020 wine grape crop, with Chenin Blanc and Chardonnay leading the pack. The early cultivars showed very good acidity, and the colour and tannin analyses in the red wines promise full wines with concentrated flavour profiles,” says Schutte. The 2020 wine harvest – including juice and concentrate for non-alcoholic purposes, wine for brandy and distilling wine – is expected to amount to 1.05-billion litres at an average recovery of 775 ℓ/t of grapes. READY FOR THE MARKET Following restrictions on both local sales and wine exports during South Africa’s Covid-19 lockdown, government allowed for the export of alcoholic products from May 1, including transport to ports and airports, as well as related activities to prepare wine for exports such as bottling and labelling. South Africa is the ninth biggest wine producer in the world and produces about 3.3% of the world’s wine. The wine industry contributes more than R36-billion to the country’s gross domestic product (GDP) and employs nearly 300 000 people.