The Dubai Desert Conservation Reserve (DDCR), the United Arab Emirates’ first national park, is undertaking several initiatives as part of its mandate to manage and represent the Dubai inland desert ecosystem, and a South African, DDCR Conservation manager Greg Simkins, is involved in all aspects of these developments. The DDCR is a protected conservation reserve with unique flora and fauna from the desert. It forms the biggest piece of land which Dubai has dedicated to a single project. The DDCR is centred to preserve Dubai’s unique desert habitat, and the many threatened flora and fauna species within. The reserve was created for the protection of those endangered species and for the conservation of the natural desert habitat and heritage. One of the initiatives by the DDCR has been the reintroduction of the Arabian Oryx, Arabian gazelle, Sand gazelle and MacQueen’s bustard, as well as implementing a habitat restoration programme by planting indigenous tree species. Moreover, the DDCR conducts research and monitoring programmes on numerous species and habitats within the reserve. These include camera trap programmes, movement studies using Global Positioning System tracking collars, extensive vegetation studies and arthropod studies. In terms of advancing environmental protection, the DDCR has embarked on a plan to “re-wild” the desert, with the initial phase to be the reduction of its ungulate population. Over the past 20 years, the DDCR’s programme to reintroduce, in particular, Arabian Oryx and establish a viable breeding population has been very successful, notes Simkins. “We have now become victims of our own success and the population has moved beyond the carrying capacity of the reserve. We have therefore decided to move some animals off the reserve into enclosures where we will separate the sexes to prevent further breeding. "The animals will then be made available to other protected areas within the region,” Simkins explains. The reduction of ungulates is expected to result in an overall improvement of the health of the ecosystem and, in the long run, to enable the DDCR to look at the reintroduction of other species that are locally extinct. The other development that is under way is that of a visitor centre for the DDCR, which is expected to greatly enhance its public awareness work. In particular, it will enable the DDCR to engage with the schools in Dubai and heighten the environmental education of the youth in the UAE, says Simkins. The DDCR is in the process of building the enclosures and is hopeful that it will move the first animals off the DDCR this year. The visitor centre is in the planning and development phase. SOUTH AFRICAN CONNECTION Simkins has worked at the DDCR since its formation in 2003 and was also part of putting together the proposal for its creation. He boasts extensive experience in his field. Prior to his role at the DDCR, he had worked at the Al Maha Desert Resort – which is located within the DDCR in Dubai – first as a field guide and then as the reserve officer for the initial protected area of 27 km², which is now part of the DDCR. Simkins acknowledges his South African background. “Having grown up in South Africa and having experience in the field of agriculture and game farms, I believe I had an advantage in understanding the importance of environmental protection and good stewardship of the land, while at the same time being aware that these practices had to be built on a foundation of sustainability.” The DDCR also expands its work to other countries, communicating its model primarily to the West Asia-Middle East region, and mainly in the form of presentations at regional meetings and workshops. Moreover, as an International Union for Conservation of Nature member, it is also involved with regional and global efforts. From a South African perspective, Simkins notes that representatives from South African Parks have attended yearly regional workshops in Sharjah for several years, leading sessions on protected area management. Further, the DDCR is in discussions with the University of Pretoria on possible research collaborations. “Deserts are harsh environments for most living organisms and the species that survive out here are uniquely adapted to thrive in this environment, being able to observe and study these species has been a great opportunity. "Working in the Middle East has given me opportunities to work with people from across the region and around the world and I have enjoyed learning from all different perspectives and experiences people have to conservation and protected area management,” Simkins says of his work in the region.