The Mapungubwe Institute for Strategic Reflection (Mistra) has hit ten years of independence and transdisciplinary research. Since May 2010, after much consultation, Mistra was founded by a group of researchers, academics, policymakers and former policy practitioners which created a platform to conduct strategic and transdisciplinary research aimed at understanding long-term issues facing South Africa, the rest of the African continent and the globe. At the core of Mistra’s undertakings, since its inception, has been the effort to interrogate why nations succeed and how civilisations sustain themselves? In a statement, Mistra said the inspiration behind these endeavours was to look beyond the horizon to identify major drivers in the evolution of human society, through core research in the areas of political economy, humanities and the application of natural sciences. “The establishment of Mistra was evidently timely and necessary for a maturing democracy oscillating between promise and betrayal, hope and despair. In a world characterised by new potent technologies as well as challenges of global warming and geopolitical tensions, it was necessary also to interrogate issues pertaining to the trajectory of human civilisation,” said the organisation. Mapungubwe Institute has sought to occupy a niche area in the research landscape. Besides the transdisciplinary of its undertakings, it has consciously eschewed short-termism dictated to by electoral cycles or quarterly returns – a culture that is much in evidence in both the public and private sectors. The Kgalema Motlanthe Foundation has congratulated Mistra in a letter addressed to its executive director Joel Netshitenzhe. The foundation says the achievements of Mistra flow out of the combined efforts and contribution of every researcher, academic, policymaker, practitioner and partner in the organisation. “This powerful shared capacity to link its work with the public and private sectors, civil society, and other social partners, accentuate Mistra as an institution that continually encourages all to push the boundaries of what is possible,” the foundation said. It says the impact of Mistra’s work as a repository of information, wisdom and education resonates in South Africa and around the world with a gravity that takes intellectual exploration to new heights and levels of success.