An African Development Bank- (AfDB-) financed and supervised water and sanitation project in Malawi has been awarded the Prince Talal International Prize for Human Development. Co-financed by the Organisation of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec) Fund for International Development and the Malawian government, the Integrated Urban Water and Sanitation project for Mzimba Town was awarded under the ‘governments and social foundations’ category. “This prestigious award is especially relevant to current global efforts to contain the Covid-19 pandemic and the urgent need for enhanced hygiene practices,” said AfDB group president Dr Akinwumi A Adesina. The project, which was implemented by Malawi’s Northern Region Water Board, is now assisting in curbing the spread of Covid-19 in Malawi. “The recognition is timely given that the project is rapidly expanding access to water supply and sanitation to communities, while promoting good hygiene practices such as hand washing with soap. Hand washing is one of the most effective ways to reduce the spread of Covid-19,” he said. The Arab Gulf Programme for Development’s Prize Committee announced the winners in the water and sanitation services category for 2019 at a virtual meeting last week. The $200 000 prize money will go to a project implemented by government agencies, public institutions or social businesses approved by the Mzimba Town scheme. The project, with the major works completed 12 months ahead of the December 2020 completion date, increased the community’s access to potable water from 65% to 95%, raised access to improved sanitation from 45% to 97% and created around 1 000 jobs. Components of the project, including a community-led total sanitation initiative, have helped to reduce diarrheal cases from 35% to 3%. About ten potable water kiosks were established in nearby rural villages, helping to curb attacks on women trekking for water, often at night. “We used to collect drinking water from streams that were a two-hour walk away. It was unsafe and contributed to waterborne diseases,” said Hunga Communal Water Point vice chairperson Maggie Hunga. The construction of primary school sanitation facilities, including secured toilets as part of the project, has provided privacy and comfort to the pupils, especially girls, who generally needed to fetch water before school. At Mzimba Prison, authorities have reported a reduction in skin diseases owing to potable water supply and improved hygiene practices. “We had a system that was on its knees. Now we provide access to potable water to 95% of our customers, 22 hours a day,” said Northern Region Water Board CEO and engineer Tutus Mtegha.