Applications for the second Jennifer Ward Oppenheimer (JWO) Research Grant, worth $150 000, are open to environmental researchers and conservation leaders from Africa. The closing date for pre-proposals is Wednesday, May 27. The JWO Grant was set up in honour of the late Jennifer Ward Oppenheimer to continue her contribution to and passion for Africa, the environment and cutting-edge science. The JWO Grant will support an African-led research programme which significantly contributes to the advancement of environmental and allied sciences – specifically to identify and address real-world issues that affect Africa. It aims to advance recognised environmental priorities across the African continent and the globe. The 2020 winner will be announced at the eleventh yearly Oppenheimer Research Conference in October. The conference is a gathering of the region’s top researchers, academics, influencers and sustainability advocates and will be held in Midrand. Last year, the first JWO Grant was awarded to Dr Hayley Clements for her research project titled 'Quantifying the Biodiversity Planetary Boundary for Africa'. Clements has been hard at work carrying out her Biodiversity Intactness Index for Africa research, through a continent-wide collaboration of biodiversity professionals. Where and how biodiversity loss impacts on human wellbeing and promoting an understanding of where investing in nature can deliver net benefits for society are some of the areas of exploration. “As Dr Clements continues her research, we look forward to the results and will continue to support African research excellence that strives to find real-world solutions for African sustainability,” says Oppenheimer Generations Conservation Research head Dr Duncan MacFadyen. QUALIFICATION PROCESS The lead applicant should be an emerging African-born scientist, affiliated to a credible African institution. The proposed research should have a focus on solving an African issue. The JWO Grant specifically targets inter- and multidisciplinary research, concentrating on the natural environment, approached through a direct or supporting field. The application process consists of two stages: the pre-proposal, which is open to all eligible applicants, and the full-proposal stage, which is by invitation only. Pre-proposals must include the lead applicant’s details, a two-page research concept note and an abbreviated Curriculum vitae. Shortlisted candidates, chosen from those who submitted pre-proposals, will be invited to submit full proposals by August 12.