People around the world are facing unprecedented challenges as a result of the outbreak of Covid-19, with many working from home or in different and unfamiliar environments that have been adapted to be safe while the disease spreads. This is resulting in an increasing number of mental health issues for people from all levels of business, from employees to company management, as they deal with different types of stress and unknowns. This uncertainty is heightening anxiety and stress as people face uncertain futures and think about job security. As a result, Business for South Africa, the Psychological Society of South Africa and the South African Depression and Anxiety Group have drawn up 'Guidelines: Mental Health for Business and the World of Work'  to help people manage and understand how to deal with their mental health. According to the guidelines, there are many actions that employees, managers and business owners can take in their everyday lives to protect and nurture their mental health. These include being realistic about what can be achieved, keeping work hours in check and being mindful of work and life balances. To assist in meeting these goals, the guidelines suggest keeping in touch with family and friends, eating well, prioritising sleep and staying physically fit. The guidelines also recommend finding time to switch off from technology and monitoring warning signs of poor mental health, as well as maintaining interests separate from work. “Do not be afraid to ask for help and access information and support services,” the guidelines suggest. In terms of support for employees, the guidelines state that business owners and managers should keep in regular contact with employees. “A routine daily check-in is good for you and for them.” The guidelines also suggest keeping staff up to date with the business’s response to Covid-19 and ensuring they are aware of any support available to them. In instances of job loss, the guidelines point out that such situations can cause significant emotional distress, which is compounded by the fact that it is no fault of the employee, and instead a result of something that is beyond their control – Covid-19. This can take a serious toll on people’s health and wellbeing, relationships and families, as well as how those affected perceive their future. However, job loss or financial insecurity is a loss like any other, the guidelines state. This is likely to trigger a grief process, which usually happens in six defined stages: shock and denial, bargaining (trying to make sense of things), anger, sadness, anxiety and finally acceptance. The guidelines point out that feelings of anger, anxiety and sadness may also become clinical conditions, like depression, and these should be monitored. In this regard, the guidelines note that social support is necessary for everyone. These include emotional support, which can be sought from a safe person to express emotional stress to. People should also seek instrumental support, which is practical-based and hands-on. Esteem should also be boosted, and reliable and useful information sought. Companionship also plays a key role in boosting social support. This comes in various forms, such as other people, pets and even books and plants. Meanwhile, tips for working from home involve setting a work schedule and keeping to it, practising personal hygiene and dressing comfortably (the same as when working from an office) and creating a separate office or workspace. Other tips include moving around every hour and going outside (within safe parameters) at least once a day and using a good chair with a proper arrangement of computer. It is also key to maintain a practical and calm approach, as widespread panic can complicate efforts to manage the outbreak. In this regard, the guidelines suggest doing the best to stay calm and following official advice. Stigma also needs to be kept in check, as the guidelines note that it is important to keep in mind that no one wants to willingly catch the virus or have a loved one become ill. “If there is fear about being ostracised for possibly being sick, then people are going to hide their symptoms, will be reluctant to seek medical help in the early stages and will not stay at home until it’s too late to keep people around them safe.” The guidelines also recommend keeping a balance of news being consumed. “Aim for a balance between knowing what is going on and getting swept up in negativity around the economy and spread of the virus.” The guidelines note that being exposed to large volumes of negative information can heighten feelings of anxiety. “While it is important to stay informed, you may find it useful to limit your media intake if it is upsetting you or your family. Limit yourself to 15 minutes of exposure to news and social media, once or twice a day,” the guidelines suggest.