The use of intelligent automation can allow for business processes to operate more effectively, while also reducing physical contact, such as at healthcare facilities, by reducing or removing manual and physical processes, says consultancy firm EY Africa intelligent automation lead Paul St Quintin. South Africa is still dependent on paper-based forms of processing, but intelligent automation is simply the use of new technologies to help organisations improve the way they operate and ensure continuity of key operations, thereby sustaining and enhancing revenues and margins. Intelligent automation includes robotic process automation, machine learning, artificial intelligence, object character recognition, chatbots and virtual advisers. "It can help to combat Covid-19 because it is so well suited to solving a number of the business challenges created by the pandemic," says St Quintin. The process of an administration clerk registering a patient at a hospital requires that the patient complete a manual form which is then handed, along with identity document, to the clerk. All details are then directly recaptured by the clerk. The application of intelligent automation in this instance can support remote or pre-registration by facilitating the capturing of required details and images without an admission clerk having to directly engage with the patient. This is also just as applicable to banks and other service companies required to execute instructions. Large numbers of businesses have simply put critical processes on hold as they are unable to manage risk while supporting remote working. Intelligent automation can be applied to a process like invoice processing; specific data can be extracted from invoices, purchase orders and the like, the necessary checks done and the corresponding payments prepared. "The benefit in this situation, regardless of the current limiting Covid-19 conditions, is that a core process, such as invoice processing, can be effectively fulfilled while ensuring that the necessary risks and controls are adhered to. It can also be implemented quickly." "[However,] when adopting intelligent automation, companies must define a very clear strategic intent and then prioritise specific areas," St Quintin advises. Automation initiatives fail because the problems that they aim to solve are not well suited for automation and the complexity of system access and database access are often underestimated. It is important for  businesses to ensure that they have determined how to operate new IA teams within their existing structures. This means proactively guiding and coaching all employees through the changes and what is expected of them at a business level, as well as on a process level.