Nearly four out of five South African consumers have tried to remove private information from websites or social media and new research by cybersecurity firm Kaspersky has found that consumers around the world want to take more action to protect and maintain control over their personal privacy, says Kaspersky consumer product marketing head Marina Titova. "Understanding how to safely keep personal details on the Internet and efficiently manage where your data is stored is a step towards ensuring a positive online presence, improving your personal reputation and opening up future opportunities," she explains. In South Africa, 77% of respondents say they have tried to remove private information from websites or social media channels. However, 47% admit that they have no idea how to go about it. "These findings reveal how fundamental protecting the privacy of our personal data and interactions online is to ensure we all continue to benefit from technology. "The report, which includes findings from a new consumer survey carried out in 23 countries, examines current consumer attitudes towards online privacy and what steps people are taking to keep private information from falling into the wrong hands." Consumers are becoming more aware of where their personal data is available online and the report shows that it is not just their private information that they are worried about, but their loved ones’ too. The report reveals that 15% of local consumers claim their personal data or information about their family has become publicly available without their consent. Such occurrences are pushing consumers into making conscious choices about how and where their personal data is stored, to stop it being viewed or used by others who do not have permission to do so. A significant proportion of people apply additional measures when browsing the Internet, including hiding their information from cybercriminals (56%), the websites they visit (35%) and other individuals accessing the same device (38%). Additionally, some consumers remain wary about storing personal information on their devices. For instance, 25% say they are concerned about personal data collected by the apps they use on their mobile devices. "People may feel they are losing control over where their data is stored and are aware of the risks connected with sharing personal information. Understandably, they do not want it used by third parties without their knowledge. "There are many ways to control your digital footprint. One of them is to bear in mind who you share personal data with and understand how it may be used. Anything that is placed on the Internet may remain accessible to a range of people for a long time unless you take specific action to protect it," says Titova. To ensure personal information remains protected on the Internet, Kaspersky advises consumers to keep a list of online accounts so they have a full understanding of which services and websites may be storing their personal information. "Consumers can also use the 'Privacy Checker' that helps consider setting your social media profiles to private. It will make it harder for third parties to find highly personal information."