German national flag-carrier Lufthansa has resumed scheduled, twice-weekly, air services between Frankfurt and Cape Town. The first of the resumed flights touched down at Cape Town International Airport (CTIA) on Thursday morning, being greeted with a ceremonial water salute. The airline has already reinstituted flights between Frankfurt and Johannesburg. “Lufthansa is pleased to be resuming flights to Cape Town, marking a return to our regular scheduled service between South Africa and Germany, following last week’s flight between Frankfurt and Johannesburg that was the first international long haul flight to return to South Africa,” stressed Lufthansa Group Airlines GM: Southern Africa & East Africa Dr André Schulz. “The Western Cape remains an attractive destination for European holidaymakers and as Lufthansa’s flight schedule is now fully operational we remain committed to continuing to support the restart of international travel into South Africa as a major airline partner for the local tourism sector.” “It’s wonderful to welcome yet another familiar and long serving airline partner back in the CTIA stable,” highlighted CTIA GM Deon Cloete. “The distinct Lufthansa colours and tail back on our ramp makes us mighty pleased. Welcome back Lufthansa – we are ready to efficiently and safely facilitate all airport passengers through our airport.” The route is being operated with an Airbus A340-300 airliner. Lufthansa has instituted special hygiene measures which apply before boarding, onboard the aircraft and after disembarkation. In Germany, Lufthansa and its partners have set up walk-in Covid-19 polymerase chain reaction testing centres at Frankfurt, Hamburg and Munich airports. The results can be provided within a few hours and passengers can register for the tests in advance and online. The airline believes that the restart of scheduled services between South Africa and Germany will benefit both countries. Apart from being a world-famous tourist centre, South Africa is also an important trade and business hub. Frankfurt is a major global air transport hub, giving access not only to Germany itself but also to more than a hundred destinations worldwide. Wesgro, the Western Cape’s provincial tourism, trade and investment agency, is in agreement with this evaluation. “Lufthansa provides a vital connection to the German market, which is the second largest source market for travel to Cape Town International Airport, and an important trade and investment partner to the Western Cape,” pointed out Wesgro CEO Tim Harris. “Cape Town and the Western Cape is open, we’re confident the destination is ready, and we welcome the world back to enjoy our province safely.”