The South African National Roads Agency Limited (Sanral) convened its flagship ‘Taking Sanral to the People’ stakeholder engagement session in Koster, North West, to foster dialogue with small, medium-sized and microenterprises (SMMEs), community members and civil society. Unpacking key projects to SMMEs and local communities, Sanral routine road maintenance (RRM) project manager Gertrude Soko said these projects include the RRM of national road R24 from Rustenburg to the Gauteng province border, the R52 from Koster to the N4 Rustenburg and the R30 from the JB Marks municipal border to Olifantsnek. “The high unemployment in South Africa exerts pressure on Sanral to maximise the number of jobs created on the projects across its road network, especially for targeted groups that include black women and youth. RRM projects within the Bojanala district municipality and in the Kgetlengrivier local municipality will promote growth, mobilise investment, create jobs and empower citizens with skills,” said Soko. She said the total construction estimate of Sanral’s projects in the municipality was R740-million. The execution of the works will start in December and tender advertisement will start in March 2021. The actual construction will start in September 2021 for 42 months until March 2025. The nature of work to be carried out under this contract includes the cleaning of all drainage structures, regular removal of grass and debris from grids, as well as clearing bridge drainage ports and scuppers, pavement layers repairs and repairing damaged road signs. It is Sanral’s requirements for its projects to have a fully functional project liaison committee (PLC) before awarding of contracts takes place. PLCs facilitate constructive community participation on Sanral projects and ensure transparency in the allocation of Sanral resources on these projects, besides other responsibilities. Sanral said it was repurposing itself, because “South Africa has embarked on a process of  fundamental transformation that opens the path for inclusive growth, ensuring broad-based economic development”.