After four years of planning and development, The Multiply Group and Devmco Group have announced the opening of Umhlanga Arch, in KwaZulu-Natal. A statement by the developers says the R1.3-billion development will redefine city living, introducing a dynamic lifestyle to South Africa and transforming the province's landscape. The property will now welcome residents and visitors into the smart-ready apartments and retail spaces, with the food court being occupied by the Legacy Yard and Backyard and other restaurants from October 6. The European-inspired high street will have a number of bespoke, local retailers open up, including fashion and jewellery stores and wellness specialists. “This is the moment we have all been waiting for and we cannot wait to welcome homeowners and the public to what has become one of South Africa’s most iconic developments to enter the property market. “Umhlanga Arch was initially an idea roughly drawn on a napkin, [it is remarkable] to think that this idea inspired the development of a world-standing and game-changing property that has challenged conventional architectural trends and ultimately raised the benchmark,” says Umhlanga Arch visionary and Multiply executive partner Mark Rosenberg. He adds that Umhlanga Arch has been a success from the start, claiming AAA-grade status, introducing South Africa’s first flagship Hilton Garden Inn, pioneering smart technology and introducing an "awe-inspiring European-inspired high street". Within the first two months of development, Umhlanga Arch had curated 400 permanent jobs, thereafter the numbers peaked at 1 300 individuals working on the site every day throughout most of 2018, 2019 and into 2020 up until the Covid-19 lockdown in March. Thereafter, work resumed in June with 1 100 workers on site every day. “Our goal was not only to introduce a revolutionary development but to change the lives of the community. Throughout the project development The Multiply Group and Devmco Group have actively engaged with city leaders, businesses and communities to ensure that local and foreign investors realise the vast potential that KwaZulu-Natal has to offer. “This development has far-reaching effects in bolstering tourism, stimulating investment into the region, further elevating Umhlanga and greater Durban to a world-class standing, and has already facilitated significant job creation to date,” Rosenberg notes. KwaZulu-Natal Economic Development, Tourism and Environmental Affairs MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube comments that this trendy development near the Gateway super-regional mall will be supported by the KZN Tourism Authority and Trade Investment KZN to welcome investors, tour operators, airlines and hotels to promote packaged deals in encouraging travel to the province.