The South African National Space Agency (Sansa) and the Academy of Science of South Africa (ASSAf) jointly announced on Wednesday that they had signed a memorandum of understanding (MoU). Both bodies are entities of the Department of Science and Innovation. The MoU would permit them to establish joint activities to ensure that the formulation of policy in the country was scientific and evidence based. This was an initiative to support all levels of government. The MoU was also intended to increase engagement with, and scientific awareness in, the country’s communities. The underlying idea was that, through collaboration, the two institutions would increase the impact and reach of their activities. The two entities could access many of the country’s top scientific minds, who could make valuable contributions in the drafting of position papers and policy briefs. “We appreciate this partnership,” said ASSAf executive officer Professor Himla Soodyall. “We have worked with Sansa on a number of activities that we should pull together to reach government, researchers, young scientists and communities to enhance the growth of science in South Africa.” “Working together through science engagement, research, scientific advice and other associated activities will enable the two entities to contribute significantly to the National Development Plan and to shape the future of our youth,” affirmed Sansa CEO Dr Val Munsami. The MoU was signed by Munsami and Soodyall, separately, in Pretoria. “[The] partnership would contribute to inspiring the next generation of scientists and engineers needed for South Africa to address national challenges and nurture a knowledge economy,” highlighted Sansa manager: partnerships Asanda Sangoni. ASSAf manager: international and national liaison Stanley Maphosa pointed out that “policy for science, science for society and science for policy has the potential to transform South Africa into a knowledge economy in line with the new White Paper on Science, Technology and Innovation”.