Tax, audit and advisory firm Mazars has unveiled its new global brand identity in more than 90 countries and territories including South Africa, marking a key milestone in the firm’s evolution. Mazars has been operating in South Africa since 2007 serving large listed, multinational and privately owned businesses. The rebrand reflects Mazars’ aspiration to bring choice and a different perspective to the audit, tax and advisory market, and reaffirms its commitment to building a fair, prosperous and sustainable world, the firm states. Mazars Group CEO and chairperson Hervé Hélias says the new brand identity and positioning resulted after two years of deep and broad consultation with Mazars’ partners, employees, clients and stakeholders. “It reflects who we are today and confirms our aspirations for the type of firm we want to be in the future.” He adds that the international Mazars team is one connected team around the world, with the scale to serve large international clients and the agility to be creative and personal in its approach. “In each country we operate, our teams combine cultural understanding with global perspective, offering clients of all shapes and sizes a true partnership, one that gives them confidence in their business and helps them achieve their ambitions.” Mazars is launching the rebrand on the back of steady, balanced growth and successful expansion, which reflects its strong position in the marketplace, it notes. In 2019, the firm recorded revenues of €1.8-billion, up 10.4% year-on-year. The increase in revenue was supported by a strong 9% year-on-year increase in organic growth. The rebrand also recognises Mazars’ evolution into an international group, now present in more than 90 countries and territories, with nearly 25 000 colleagues around the world. The Mazars North America Alliance brings an additional 16 000 professionals available to serve Mazars’ international clients who operate in the US and Canada. The firm’s international expansion is reflected in the geographic spread of its revenue sources – more than a third of Mazars’ fee income now comes from outside Europe. Asia-Pacific enjoyed the highest growth rate of 22.6% in 2018/19 and this region now represents about 15% of Mazars’ total revenues. In terms of Mazars’ growth and expansion, Hélias says that, in 75 years, the firm’s guiding principles have not changed, but instead the firm has. “We have doubled in size in the past ten years and the diversity of our offerings, clients and talent has flourished as we have grown.” At present, Mazars works with nearly 2 000 public interest entity (PIE) clients, almost 140 large listed companies, and more than 50 000 privately-owned and family businesses, from private clients and startups, to mature international clients. Mazars is an international and multicultural company, built on partnerships, which continues to grow and extend its reach around the world, including in South Africa. The rebrand will help Mazars present itself more consistently across the globe, but it will always celebrate its local roots in South Africa, say Mazars South Africa co-CEOs Anoop Ninan and Michelle Olckers. According to the firm, its ability to collaborate with agility on a global scale and being recognised for the diversity and quality of its professionals and empowering them to deliver consistent, high-quality and bespoke services that meet clients’ needs means that Mazars brings a “genuinely different perspective” to the audit, tax and advisory market. Meanwhile, Hélias points out that Mazars University recently received Corporate Learning Improvement Process accreditation for the second time running. “This is the leading accreditation for corporate universities. We feel a strong responsibility towards our people and their employability. Helping them grow as experts in their fields and empowering them to lead is essential to serve our clients according to our highest standards and remain an employer of choice.”