Russia’s State-owned nuclear group, Rosatom, has announced that it has joined the United Nations (UN) Global Compact. This is the world’s biggest corporate social responsibility and sustainable development initiative, having more than 13 000 member companies from more than 160 countries. “The highest social standards, as well as ecological responsibility and safety principles have historically been a part of the nuclear industry paradigm,” highlighted Rosatom director-general Alexey Likhachev. “Support of the UN’s 17 Sustainable Development Goals is a crucial aspect of Rosatom’s corporate strategy.” The UN Global Compact has ten principles, covering anti-corruption, the environment, human rights and labour. Joining the initiative required Rosatom to issue a letter of commitment to these principles. The company also committed itself to incorporating the UN Global Compact’s principles into its culture, strategy and everyday operations. “This [northern] summer Rosatom approved a Unified Industry Policy on Sustainable Development,” he pointed out. “Through its work, Rosatom strives to create favourable conditions for human living, all [the] while ensuring that environment and natural resources are treated respectfully and sustainably. I am pleased that the UN Global Compact experts have approved Rosatom’s application. For us, this is yet another signal that our efforts in the Russian and international markets are welcomed by the global community.” The group is focused on developing low carbon energy sources, both nuclear and wind generated. In the nuclear field, it covers the entire nuclear cycle, starting with the mining (and subsequent conversion and enrichment) of uranium, fuel production and supply, spent fuel storage, fuel and spent fuel transport, nuclear waste disposal, as well as the design, construction and operation of nuclear power plants. Outside the energy sector, Rosatom also makes equipment and radioisotope products for nuclear medicine, materials science and scientific research. It further produces innovative digital and nuclear, as well as non-nuclear, products.