Johannesburg Executive Mayor Geoffrey Makhubo has warned "business forums" not to interfere in service delivery projects. “The stopping of service delivery projects by business forums will not be tolerated as it delays the completion of projects and the provision of much-needed service to the people of our city. "Business forums should follow proper channels to raise their grievances regarding any city-led projects,” he said in a statement issued on October 6. Makhubo, accompanied by Transport MMC Councillor Nonhlanhla Makhuba and Development Planning Councillor Lawrence Khoza, was speaking during an oversight tour of the Rea Vaya Phase 1C (a) route in Wynberg. The Rea Vaya Phase 1C (a) is a new route that will connect Phase 1A and 1B from the Joburg central business district to Alexandra and Sandton. It is  under construction and due for completion in 2021. The oversight tour formed part of the October Transport Month activities, as well as part of the Executive Mayor’s monitoring and evaluation responsibilities. “The introduction of Phase 1C (a) will bring safe, affordable and reliable transport to the residents of Berea, Yeoville, Orange Grove, Cheldondale, Norwood, Balfour Park, Bramley, Wynberg, Alexandra, Marlboro, Athol, Sandton, Sandown, Longmeadow and Greenstone,” said Makhubo. The Watt Interchange is expected to form a key link connecting the bus rapid transport (BRT) systems from other Gauteng metropolitan areas. The project will also result in the construction of new BRT lanes and an underground station with associated structures and bulk earthworks. “Transport is one of the backbones of Johannesburg’s economy and plays a significant role in connecting residents safely and affordably to education, business and work opportunities. The Watt Interchange forms part of the Rea Vaya BRT system’s greater public transport connectivity in Wynberg and Alexandra for easy access and convenience to minibus taxis, Rea Vaya and Metrobus. This project is key for integration of the different modes of transport in the city,” Makhubo indicated. Once completed, the Watt Interchange will stand as an integrated public transport interchange, which will consist of underground basement loading and off-loading bays; a commuter information area; a designated trunk route; and a universally accessible facility.