The government of the Australian state of Queensland and the giant US aerospace and defence group Boeing have signed a deal that will make the state the home for the production of the Royal Australian Air Force’s (RAAF’s) future unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), currently known as Loyal Wingman. The UAV will be operated alongside the RAAF’s manned combat aircraft in both the attack and reconnaissance roles. The Loyal Wingman prototype was unveiled in early May and made its first ground engine test runs last month. It is currently undergoing all the required tests and checks before it makes its first flight. Up to March last year the Australian government had invested $28.7-million (Aus$40-million) in the project. The new deal creates a partnership between Queensland and Boeing Australia and will see the state invest in the programme. In return, the development and manufacture of the UAV will be located in the state. Loyal Wingman is the first military aircraft designed, engineered and assembled in Australia in more than 50 years. It is also the first military aircraft to be designed and built by Boeing outside the US. “The creation of additional new aerospace capability could see unmanned defence aircraft produced here by the middle of the decade, with prototype testing and certification taking place before that,” pointed out Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk. “We are carrying out our plan to recover and grow, including into new industries, and it’s very important that we do that not just as a government but with key partnerships. Our investment in this advanced manufacturing project will provide critical skills for suppliers, academia and Boeing, and culminate in Queensland becoming the primary final assembly facility for the Boeing Airpower Teaming System, conditional on orders.” (Boeing Airpower Teaming System is the company’s formal designation for the Loyal Wingman programme.) “[This partnership] will build cutting-edge skills to stimulate the innovation ecosystem in Queensland,” highlighted Boeing Australia, New Zealand and South Pacific president Brendan Nelson. “This includes introducing technologies such as advanced robotics; investment in universities, small-to-medium enterprises and startup companies; as well as creating global export opportunities for Australia’s supply chain. This investment could unlock global defence and aerospace opportunities for Queensland to gain future work share in other Boeing programmes.” The US group already has 1 700 employees in Queensland and has supply contracts with 400 companies in the state. Boeing Defence Australia and Boeing Research & Technology Australia are both based in the state capital of Brisbane. The group also has a facility in the state of Victoria, producing aerostructures. 