JOHANNESBURG (miningweekly.com) – Doing the ordinary tasks extraordinarily well is the current short-term tactic of platinum group metals (PGMs) mining company Anglo American Platinum (Amplats) under new CEO Natascha Viljoen, who is intent on stretching the company’s existing assets to their full capacity. “We don’t deserve the right to grow unless we know that the assets we have are absolutely optimised,” Viljoen said during a Coronation Fund Managers webinar, covered by Mining Weekly. (Also watch attached Creamer Media video.) In the last four months, going back to basics had produced rich returns, despite Covid, Viljoen emphasised under questioning from Coronation’s Pallavi Ambekar about where she would be taking the company in the next five to ten years. The best starting response to the question, she said, would be to give credit to her predecessor Chris Griffith and his team for having already strategically simplified what was a very complex business, during very challenging times of low commodity prices. Viljoen credited Griffith with turning the business around by reducing all-in sustaining costs significantly and, in spite of fundamental business restructuring, increasing production. As there was no longer a need for hard decision-making and tree pruning, the current opportunity was to make sure that the assets in hand were stretched to their full capacity, she emphasised. What was needed now was to maximise the gains already made, something that was not strategic but very tactical and exemplified by drilling holes for blasting in the right place and at the right depth. “People have that in their heads, but we haven’t institutionalised it and made it part of the DNA of the business. In the last four months, despite Covid, just by going back to basics, we’ve seen record productions month-on-month at our openpit Mogalakwena mine. “Going back to basics, first point, making it part of who we are and how we work, through our operating model, and then putting technology and digital as overlays in that to make sure that we don’t lose that capability again,” Viljoen said. Every mine is programmed to deliver against company’s P101 best-practice target, which is expected to be attained in the next two to three years. INTEGRATING THE VALUE CHAIN Amplats, which has an enviable end-to-end integrated value chain, provides the opportunity to think through achieving the best returns from having that advantaged position. Each of its mining assets has a different product basket when it comes to PGMs and base metals. Each has its own unique position in the Amplats portfolio, which allows the company to respond to specific market demand and the company has the strategic advantage of having processing facilities, allowing it to make direct contact with customers. Small organic growth opportunities are present at the mechanised underground Unki PGM mine in Zimbabwe – “an operation that’s so well run” within the constraints of the Zimbabwean realities. Mototolo, also underground and mechanised, presents an initial replacement opportunity, followed by an expansion opportunity. At Amandelbult, the company’s only deep-level conventional underground mine, a modernising programme is under way within its stopes and its future will also be mechanised. At the first-tier Mogalakwena mine,  the world’s most profitable PGMs operation, the opportunities include expanding the existing surface operation, technically advancing the concentrator plant, integration of its value chain and going underground. “We’ve got quite a unique opportunity at Mogalakwena because we setting this operation up for the first portion of its 100-year life,” Viljoen said. PGMS ROLE IN HYDROGEN ECONOMY HAILED PGMs play a vital role in cleaning the air of cities by making the automotive industry cleaner and greener. “It doesn’t matter what the future of the drivetrain looks like, with our diversity of products, we can play a role in the electrification of the drivetrain, enable the automotive industry to respond to stricter vehicle emission legislation and contribute to the hydrogen economy. “The only place we don’t play a role is in battery electric vehicles. But if you consider decarbonisation and impacting on global warming, I think our products have got a key place and to a point, I think, our responsibility is also to help develop that market. “Another interesting technology that we’re busy with is the building of a hydrogen mine truck, using fully green hydrogen, and not only will that help us our decarbonisation journey, but I think that the technology development that’s associated with it will play a big role in the broader hydrogen economy. I think it’s actually quite an exciting environment where it can be truly green and the applications can range from heavy duty vehicles to stationary fuel cells,’ Viljoen said.