The South African National Roads Agency Limited (Sanral) has completed its works on the Madidi bridge, in Madibeng, North West. Transport Minister Fikile Mbabula attended the opening of the 50-m-long Madidi bridge, which was built over the Sand river to serve as a link between the Phasha and Madidi remote village and the rest of the Madibeng local municipality, as well as other neighbouring areas of Gauteng. The construction project resulted in the training and employment of local workers, comprising young people and women, particularly, over a sixteen-month period. Additionally, 25 local subcontractors were given an opportunity to carry out site works. The Minister said investment in road infrastructure upgrades, especially in rural and marginalised communities, provides an opportunity for generating economic growth, alleviating poverty, reducing the scourge of inequality and increasing international competitiveness. “It is for these reasons, among many, that the Department of Transport (DoT) through its Labour Intensive Rural Roads Programme, purposely invests in rural communities.” Meanwhile, in South Africa’s transport month, the DoT and Sanral also gathered to officially open the Hammarsdale Interchange, which is an interchange that is part of the agency’s Eastern Region, consisting of KwaZulu-Natal and the Free State. The department has committed to, throughout October, travel through the length and breadth of South Africa to monitor service delivery of roads infrastructure and intervene where challenges persist. Mbalula says the theme “Together shaping the future of transport” for transport month this year has been dedicated to highlighting the impact that roads have on the economy, accelerating roads infrastructure projects and intervening on roads service delivery. The DoT will soon host the National Taxi Lekgotla, which will once again bring taxi industry stakeholders under one roof to chart a way forward for this important industry. The Lekgotla will hopefully conclude the long-standing debate on subsidising, professionalising and regulating the taxi industry.