Managed information technology (IT) services firm Troye is, through its partnership with digital workspace, networking and analytics multinational Citrix, helping customers build digital workplaces on Amazon Web Services (AWS). This enables end-users to work securely on virtually any device from any location at any time, says Troye CEO Helen Kruger in a statement. Citrix helps local customers leverage the agility, breadth of services and pace of innovation of AWS. Existing customers are already using Citrix solutions on AWS to securely offer access to apps and data regardless of time, network, device or work location. Citrix offers a range of solutions that are proven to scale and integrate with AWS and ensure the security, reliability and high performance that application delivery and management today demands. As a validated AWS Outposts solution, the Citrix application delivery controller (ADC) can be used to bring native AWS services, infrastructure and operating models to on-premises facilities in a simple, cost-effective way and deliver a consistent hybrid experience. Leveraging Amazon Virtual Private Cloud (Amazon VPC) ingress routing features, companies can redirect traffic flowing in and out of a VPC through Citrix ADC to ensure reliable performance and simplify the integration of network and security appliances within their network topology. "Employees need a consistent work experience that enables them to perform to the best of their ability. It is critical that we enable our customers, through technology, to get the work done safely and securely and from any location," says Kruger. AWS enables scalable, flexible and cost-effective solutions for startup companies and global enterprises. To support the seamless integration and deployment of these solutions, AWS established the AWS Competency Programme to help customers identify consulting and technology AWS Partner Network members with deep industry experience and expertise. The AWS Digital Workplace Competency Programme helps customers effectively support remote workers and business continuity with end-to-end digital workplace in the cloud. Citrix has deep domain expertise in endpoint management, application management and collaboration platforms, notes Kruger. "Citrix and AWS collaborated to develop an AWS QuickStart for Citrix Virtual Apps and Desktop Service on AWS. Using the service, companies can deliver secure virtual apps and desktops to any device, and leave most of the product installation, setup, configuration, upgrades and monitoring to Citrix, while maintaining complete control over applications, policies and users and delivering a high-quality user experience," she explains. AWS Quick Start for Citrix ADC empowers companies to speed up and automate configuration, greatly reducing the time, costs and skill level involved. Additionally, using the Citrix software-defined wide-area network, or SD-WAN, orchestration service, customers can quickly connect their branches and data centres to the AWS Transit Gateway and access resources across any Amazon VPC or another connected network.