The 110 MW Perdekraal East Wind Farm project has achieved its commercial operations date (COD), leading the way for a further eleven wind farms to come on stream. This comes almost two years after construction began at the site. Additionally, wind farm will emit zero carbon emissions and will use almost no water during the power generation process. Collectively, 1.3 GW of new wind power capacity will be added to the country’s national grid as part of bid window four of the government’s Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement Programme (REIPPPP). Perdekraal East Wind Farm was built by Siemens, Concor and Conco Consortium, and about 2.8% of the wind farm’s revenue will be spent on socioeconomic development and 0.2% on enterprise development over a 20-year period. The wind farm, located just outside Western Cape town of Ceres, started its 20-year commercial operations period on October 8, and is set to make an impact on South Africa’s national grid, while simultaneously continuing to grow the social resilience of the surrounding Witzenberg communities. In line with the renewable energy sector trend, which is working to meet the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy’s local content requirements, the wind farm achieved a very high local content level of more than 48%. “As we enter this new phase, we are pleased to note that employment opportunities, skills development, socioeconomic development and enterprise development are just some of the ways local communities will benefit during the wind farm’s [starting] 20-year operational period,” said Perdekraal East Wind Farm construction programme manager Christo Loots. Perdekraal Wind Farm is owned by a number of equity members, which include Lekela Power, Mainstream Renewable Power, H1 Holdings, African Rainbow Energy and Power, Old Mutual Life Assurance Company and the Pedekraal East Renewable Energy Community Trust. In a separate statement on October 8, Lekela Power said Perdekraal East is one of the company’s eight projects on the continent, with four in operation in South Africa, and a further four under construction or development in South Africa, Senegal, Ghana and Egypt. In total, Lekela has more than 1 000 MW in operation or under construction in its African portfolio. Lekela Power CEO Chris Antonopoulos said the important milestone means “South Africa gains more advantage from its abundant sustainable resources. More vital power flows into the national grid with all the concomitant benefits for the country and its citizens”. Lekela is a significant, long-term investor in South Africa’s renewable energy sector and has, to date, committed R420-million of a total investment of R1.8-billion. Perdekraal East Wind Farm is one 12 wind farms in South Africa that had to halt construction in March when the country lockdown in March. Activity resumed on site in late May, after having cost the team over 50 days of work. JSE-listed Consolidated Infrastructure Group is responsible for the electrical component of the balance of plant works, including the engineering, procurement and construction, as well as the electrical works for the wind farm.