Global technology company ABB has expressed its support for the launch of an engineering scholarship programme for Africa. ETH Zurich, in Switzerland, and Ashesi University, in Ghana, are working with ABB and other Swiss multinationals Barry Callebaut, Bühler, LafargeHolcim and Nestlé to ensure highly talented engineering graduates effectively contribute towards economic development across Africa. Once all upcoming milestones have been achieved, this first-of-its-kind Master’s programme, called Ashesi-ETH Master’s in Engineering, is set to begin in August 2021 or as soon as possible thereafter and will be facilitated by Ashesi University. This collaborative approach is designed to support capacity building through the development and strengthening of skills, processes and resources required to drive the success of the programme, establish its sustainability beyond this initial collaboration and foster knowledge transfer between the two institutions. “ABB is excited to be part of such an impactful initiative that aims to bridge the gap between higher education and the reality of working in industry,” says ABB head of people development Carolina Granat. She adds that ABB remains committed to educating and training highly-skilled leaders and entrepreneurs, who can accelerate economic and social development by applying global innovations to solve complex problems in Africa. ABB’s contribution to this programme continues the company’s longstanding support for education in communities across the world, from providing mobile science laboratories for underprivileged students in India, mentoring young engineers in Hungary, to Instituto ABB’s more than 20 years of educating children from the favelas of São Paulo. The programme is targeted at undergraduate students with an engineering background from any country in Africa. Intake is limited to 30 students, with the best candidates identified using an assessment process that will consider knowledge, skills, motivation and leadership potential. Parallel to the assessment process, ABB explains in a release that the scholarships will be awarded purely based on academic merit. Students admitted to the programme will receive financial support in the form of a scholarship covering living expenses and tuition fees. The curriculum for the collaborative Master’s programme is focused on providing a modern, interdisciplinary engineering education over six semesters and will include lectures, and project work. It will have a particular focus on mechatronics engineering, with close attention to automation and production in the disciplines of design, optimization, control and management of manufacturing processes, machines and systems. Students will be expected to develop strong critical thinking and problem-solving skills that will enable them to apply their knowledge to new products and/or dedicated solutions for sub-Saharan Africa. They will also be required to complete an industrial internship with a partner such as ABB to continue to drive leadership in technology and innovation throughout the duration of the programme to accumulate the credits required to graduate. Upon completion of the three-year programme, graduates will receive a degree title from both ETH Zurich and Ashesi University.