The South African Photovoltaic Industry Association (SAPVIA) and the European association for solar SolarPower Europe have joined forces to unlock the potential of solar power and ensure that South Africa reaps the economic and societal benefits of renewable energy. Both associations have been at the forefront of shaping the regulatory environment in their respective territories. By partnering, they will drive forward innovation through knowledge sharing, adopting best practice and the exchange of information. SAPVIA says in a statement that the partnership will serve to elevate the solar power sector and deliver on its potential to reach nearly 1 TW of global generation capacity in 2021. SAPVIA COO Niveshen Govender states that the collaboration between the associations will allow SAPVIA members to capitalise on the significant opportunities that solar photovoltaic (PV) offers. “We need to create the right framework for growth, establish the right governance and renewable energy regulations and ensure industry is ready to make the step change and accelerate the growth of solar PV. “Working with SolarPower Europe, we will share global best practices with our members through dynamic knowledge sharing to develop and grow the solar PV value chain in South Africa. “We will help create new business opportunities in the European and South African solar PV markets by cooperating across a number of key areas that we believe will deliver immediate and sustainable results,” Govender explains. Over the next 12 months, SAPVIA and SolarPower Europe members will gain access to exclusive webinars and events. This will start with international knowledge sharing and the development of best practices guidelines for solar PV operation and maintenance. The partnership will allow South African and European players to access knowledge on digitalisation and storage, policy advocacy, regulatory frameworks and sustainability and recycling to fully untap solar energy’s global potential. SolarPower Europe CEO Walburga Hemetsberger stresses that South Africa is the largest solar market in Africa and says the potential for growth is extraordinary. “We look forward to exchanging knowledge and best practices to benefit both the European and South African solar sectors. Together, we can accelerate the growth of solar power, bring vast economic and social opportunities to both continents and pave the way to a climate-neutral future." SolarPower Europe has more than 200 members active along the whole solar PV value chain. SolarPower Europe’s mission is to shape the regulatory environment and enhance business opportunities for solar in the European market. The association develops award winning business intelligence and best practices reports on markets, industry and technologies, informing its members and external stakeholders on the latest trends in the PV industry. The association is acknowledged as an essential content provider for European political stakeholders – including European Union institutions and opinion leaders. In turn, SAPVIA is a nonprofit industry association that aims to promote, develop and grow the PV sector as part of the wider renewable energy industry in South Africa. The association serves the collective interests of its 130 members and 244 registered rooftop installation companies in matters of development, regulation and socioeconomics.