Messe Frankfurt South Africa is partnering with the National Association of Automobile Manufacturers of South Africa (Naamsa) in a virtual engagement session on Wednesday, November 18, to probe the way forward for the local and global motor industry. This event will be staged in association with AutoTrader under the banner of HyperMobility, with the theme for the event being “Navigating the turbulence together towards mobility 4.0”. “The purpose of this year’s digital engagement is to bring together experts across various sectors of the automotive and related industries who, either directly or indirectly, influence the future direction and developments in these important spheres of the economy both locally and globally,” says Naamsa CEO Mike Mabasa. “We look forward to bringing some colour to the pressing challenges we face currently and how, collectively, we will take the industry into the future.” AutoTrader CEO George Mienie points out that the conference could not have come at a more opportune time. “This is undoubtedly the most turbulent year in the history of the motor industry. It has been shaken to its very roots. We have seen massive changes in the way in which consumers search for and buy vehicles,” he notes. “We have seen changes in the actual vehicles that they are searching for and buying. We have even seen considerable differences in the way in which people are choosing to sell their cars. “One of the common themes of this ever-changing macroeconomic environment is the escalating importance of automotive digital retailing. Companies within the automotive industry are fast acknowledging the fact that, if they wish to stay relevant in the minds of consumers and on top of their game, their future will look very different to their past. “Today our present is speaking loudly, and the message is that digital transformation is our future direction,” says Mienie. Subjects to be covered at the conference will extend from manufacturing vehicles and components, to service and repair technologies required for electric, autonomous, connected, and shared mobility solutions.