South African private-sector airline Airlink has signed an interline agreement with major intercontinental airline Qatar Airways. This will establish seamless connectivity between the two carriers, giving Airlink customers access to Qatar’s global network and Qatar’s passengers access to Airlink’s South and Southern Africa network of more than 45 destinations. Currently, Qatar is operating more than 650 flights a week to more than 90 destinations. “We are proud and excited about our new interline commercial agreement with Qatar Airways,” affirmed Airlink CEO Rodger Foster. “We have a deep respect for Qatar Airways, its value and its global reach. We are confident that the relationship will deliver enhanced travel options to customers given the designed interconnectivity that will be enabled at OR Tambo International Airport and Cape Town International Airport. Airlink’s offering of connectable destinations includes most key points within Southern Africa such as: Cape Town, Durban, Port Elizabeth, East London, Bloemfontein, Harare, Lusaka, Maputo, Gaborone, Windhoek, amongst many others.” “As the most connected airline during the pandemic with a network that never fell below 30 destinations, we strive to continue to offer more flexibility and options for our passengers,” highlighted Qatar Airways VP Africa Hendrik du Preez. “We are delighted to sign this interline agreement with Airlink to further expand our network in the region connecting passengers to more than 25 [South African] domestic and more than 20 [Southern African] regional destinations. With the borders in South Africa being closed for five months, we are thrilled to re-enter the market with additional connections in South Africa and beyond.” Qatar Airways is committed to ensuring the health and safety of its passengers and personnel. This includes the use of the latest technologies including the use of ultraviolet light to ‘inactivate’ viruses and bacteria. Separately, Airlink has also announced the launch of its new service between Johannesburg and the Mozambican capital of Maputo. This is operated on Wednesdays and Fridays every week, the Johannesburg to Maputo flights being coded 4Z272 and the return flights being coded 4Z273. “Airlink is proud and excited to be launching this brand new service and adding it to our growing Southern African route network,” asserted Foster. “It provides travellers with more choices, while also enabling crucial trade, business, tourism and family ties between two close regional markets. Although we have begun flights to Maputo, we plan to add more Mozambican destinations to our schedule in the coming days.”