In August last year, Toyota and Suzuki announced a formal alliance between the two carmakers in order “to leverage each other’s strengths and compete in the evolving global vehicle market”. Toyota’s expertise in hybrid technology and autonomous driving would be of benefit to Suzuki, while Toyota would gain access to compact vehicles – a Suzuki strength. The first product to come out of this brand alliance and make it to South Africa’s shores is the Toyota Starlet. The Starlet name dates back to 1973, and has adorned Toyota’s sub-compact hatchback in the Japanese domestic market for five generations, ending in 1999. Now, however, the newcomer revives the Starlet badge. The Starlet will replace the popular Etios in the South African market – a vehicle that captured an average 22% share of the sub-B segment over its lifespan. The sub-B segment accounts for the second-highest share of passenger-vehicle sales in South Africa and is fiercely competitive territory. Toyota South Africa says the Starlet builds on the core strengths of Etios, namely good performance, fuel efficiency and affordable pricing. The vehicle is imported from the Suzuki factory in India, but with Toyota responsible for the product planning, model line-up and determination of specification levels. The Starlet is powered by a 1.4-litre four-cylinder engine. Power output is pegged at 68 kW at 6 000 rpm, with 130 Nm of torque at 4 200 rpm. There are two transmission choices on offer, a five-speed manual and four-speed automatic, all driving the front wheels. Fuel consumption (using a 37-litre fuel tank) is stated at between 5.1 l/100 km and 5.4 l/100 km, depending on variant. The entry-level Xi model features air-conditioning, electric power steering, dual 12-volt power outlets, electric windows, tilt-adjustable steering column, 60/40 split rear seats, power-adjustable side mirrors and remote central locking. Xi and Xs models also feature an audio system with CD/Bluetooth/USB/Aux functionality, playing through six speakers. The Xr models adds a touchscreen audio system, with Android Auto and Apple CarPlay integration for navigation, telephony and music-streaming services. All Starlet models are also equipped with the Toyota Connect telematics system, which includes an in-car WiFi hotspot and complimentary 15 GB data. Once linked to their profile, customers can manage their vehicle via the MyToyota App. This app allows for on-demand service bookings, vehicle information and history, tracking data, as well as Toyota Connect data recharge services. All Starlet models have active electronic aids such as antilock braking, electronic brake-force distribution, brake assist, and vehicle-stability control. Automatic transmission models also include hill-assist control. Xi and Xs models are fitted with driver and passenger airbags, while the Xr variants also feature curtain and side airbags. Pricing starts at R204 900. All Starlet models are sold with a three-year service/45 000 km service plan, with 15 000 km service intervals. A three-year/100 000 km warranty is also provided.