Industry organisation the International Air Transport Association (Iata) has warned that the damage being done to the African aviation industry and economies by the shutdown of air traffic owing to the Covid-19 pandemic has deepened. According to new data published by the Air Transport Action Group, of which Iata is a member, on October 2, 4.5-million African jobs will be lost in aviation and industries supported by aviation this year. This is well over half of the region’s 7.7-million aviation-related jobs. The data also indicates that 172 000 jobs will be lost in aviation this year, which is about 40% of the continent's 440 000 aviation jobs. Moreover, it notes that gross domestic product supported by aviation in the region will fall by up to $37-billion, which is 58% below pre-Covid-19 levels. “The breakdown in air connectivity in Africa has severe social and economic consequences for millions. No income means the lack of a social safety net for many. "Governments need to do all they can to reconnect the continent safely. Keeping borders closed or imposing measures, such as quarantines, that deter air travel will result in many more livelihoods being lost and further economic shrinkage along with hardship and poverty,” said Iata Africa and the Middle East regional VP Muhammad Albakri. To minimise the impact on jobs and the broader African economy, an accelerated recovery of air transport across the region is paramount, the association emphasised. It said this could be achieved through Covid-19 testing as an alternative to restrictive quarantine measures. Thirty-one countries in Africa were opening their borders to regional and international air travel. In 22 countries, however, passengers are still subject to a mandatory 14-day quarantine, noted the organisation. It posited that this effectively stops people from travelling. Iata said it was calling for the systematic testing of passengers before departure, which it said would enable governments to safely open borders without quarantine measures and better support recovery efforts. “Quarantine measures are crippling the industry’s recovery and hampering its ability to support social and economic development. Testing for Covid-19 will enable Africa and the world to safely reconnect and recover,” said Albakri.