Information technology services company T-Systems South Africa and integrated, automated cybersecurity solutions company Fortinet have announced plans to launch a specialised Cybersecurity Academy in South Africa during October. The academy will be incorporated into T-Systems South Africa's existing Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Academy. The new Cybersecurity Academy will include Fortinet’s Network Security Expert (NSE) certifications, helping participants build cybersecurity awareness skills and upskill to address a widening global cybersecurity workforce shortage. “Cybersecurity has become a top C-level priority across the globe, with skills in high demand. With the addition of this focus to our ICT Academy, we are empowering participants with new skills that will make them even more employable,” explains T-Systems South Africa ICT Academy manager Marcus Karuppan. Learners who are already part of the ICT Academy will now be able to gain additional skills in infrastructure security, as well as the new cybersecurity stream. New learners will also be able to join the new cybersecurity programme. “Empowered with an international certification from our ICT Academy, learners are able to apply for both local and global jobs abroad. "As all of our learners come from disadvantaged backgrounds, this is an incredible opportunity for them to gain valuable qualifications and experience. Our goal is to create a pool of employable graduates with skills in the security sector to help address a noticeable skills gap in South Africa,” he says. The ICT Academy offers learners the opportunity to study toward a National Qualifications Framework (NQF) 4 qualification in their first year. In the second year, they work towards an NQF 5 qualification to earn their national certification in either telecommunications network operations, systems support or systems development. Collaborating with Fortinet’s Security Academy Program, participants will now also be able to complete Fortinet’s NSE certification level 4 qualification. “We are proud to extend our solution-selling relationship with T-Systems to include sharing the valuable curriculum from the Fortinet NSE Training Institute. T-Systems is a leader in expanding education access to close the cybersecurity skills gap,” says Fortinet regional director for Africa Doros Hadjizenonos. "Our goal is to enable corporate social investment programmes, like the ICT Academy, to empower participants with an international qualification. We cover the cost of the online curriculum and certification to enable this programme to be offered to [as broad a] base of learners as possible, and the ICT Academy will fund the cost of the facilities and resources required for programme implementation," he adds.